https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.2/ref/models/querysets/
QuerySet API reference 
This document describes the details of the QuerySet API. It builds on the
material presented in the model and database
query guides, so you'll probably want to read and
understand those documents before reading this one.
Throughout this reference we'll use the example Weblog models presented in the database query guide.
When QuerySets are evaluated 
Internally, a QuerySet can be constructed, filtered, sliced, and generally
passed around without actually hitting the database. No database activity
actually occurs until you do something to evaluate the queryset.
You can evaluate a QuerySet in the following ways:
Iteration. A QuerySet is iterable, and it executes its database
query the first time you iterate over it. For example, this will print
the headline of all entries in the database:
Note: Don't use this if all you want to do is determine if at least one
result exists. It's more efficient to use exists().
Slicing. As explained in Limiting QuerySets, a QuerySet can
be sliced, using Python's array-slicing syntax. Slicing an unevaluated
QuerySet usually returns another unevaluated QuerySet, but Django
will execute the database query if you use the "step" parameter of slice
syntax, and will return a list. Slicing a QuerySet that has been
evaluated also returns a list.
Also note that even though slicing an unevaluated QuerySet returns
another unevaluated QuerySet, modifying it further (e.g., adding
more filters, or modifying ordering) is not allowed, since that does not
translate well into SQL and it would not have a clear meaning either.
Pickling/Caching. See the following section for details of what
is involved when pickling QuerySets. The important thing for the
purposes of this section is that the results are read from the database.
repr(). A QuerySet is evaluated when you call repr() on it.
This is for convenience in the Python interactive interpreter, so you can
immediately see your results when using the API interactively.
len(). A QuerySet is evaluated when you call len() on it.
This, as you might expect, returns the length of the result list.
Note: If you only need to determine the number of records in the set (and
don't need the actual objects), it's much more efficient to handle a count
at the database level using SQL's SELECT COUNT(*). Django provides a
count() method for precisely this reason.
list(). Force evaluation of a QuerySet by calling list() on
it. 
bool(). Testing a QuerySet in a boolean context, such as using
bool(), or, and or an if statement, will cause the query
to be executed. If there is at least one result, the QuerySet is
True, otherwise False. 
Note: If you only want to determine if at least one result exists (and don't
need the actual objects), it's more efficient to use exists().
Pickling QuerySets 
If you pickle a QuerySet, this will force all the results to be loaded
into memory prior to pickling. Pickling is usually used as a precursor to
caching and when the cached queryset is reloaded, you want the results to
already be present and ready for use (reading from the database can take some
time, defeating the purpose of caching). This means that when you unpickle a
QuerySet, it contains the results at the moment it was pickled, rather
than the results that are currently in the database.
If you only want to pickle the necessary information to recreate the
QuerySet from the database at a later time, pickle the query attribute
of the QuerySet. You can then recreate the original QuerySet (without
any results loaded) using some code like this:
The query attribute is an opaque object. It represents the internals of
the query construction and is not part of the public API. However, it is safe
(and fully supported) to pickle and unpickle the attribute's contents as
described here.
Restrictions on QuerySet.values_list()
If you recreate QuerySet.values_list() using the pickled query
attribute, it will be converted to QuerySet.values():
You can't share pickles between versions
Pickles of QuerySets are only valid for the version of Django that
was used to generate them. If you generate a pickle using Django
version N, there is no guarantee that pickle will be readable with
Django version N+1. Pickles should not be used as part of a long-term
archival strategy.
Since pickle compatibility errors can be difficult to diagnose, such as
silently corrupted objects, a RuntimeWarning is raised when you try to
unpickle a queryset in a Django version that is different than the one in
which it was pickled.
QuerySet API 
Here's the formal declaration of a QuerySet:
class QuerySet(model=None, query=None, using=None, hints=None)[source] 
Usually when you'll interact with a QuerySet you'll use it by
chaining filters. To make this work, most
QuerySet methods return new querysets. These methods are covered in
detail later in this section.
The QuerySet class has two public attributes you can use for
introspection:
ordered 
True if the QuerySet is ordered — i.e. has an
order_by() clause or a default ordering on the model.
False otherwise.
db 
The database that will be used if this query is executed now.
Note
The query parameter to QuerySet exists so that specialized
query subclasses can reconstruct internal query state. The value of the
parameter is an opaque representation of that query state and is not
part of a public API.
Methods that return new QuerySets 
Django provides a range of QuerySet refinement methods that modify either
the types of results returned by the QuerySet or the way its SQL query is
executed.
filter() 
filter(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns a new QuerySet containing objects that match the given lookup
parameters.
The lookup parameters (**kwargs) should be in the format described in
Field lookups below. Multiple parameters are joined via AND in the
underlying SQL statement.
If you need to execute more complex queries (for example, queries with OR statements),
you can use Q objects (*args).
exclude() 
exclude(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns a new QuerySet containing objects that do not match the given
lookup parameters.
The lookup parameters (**kwargs) should be in the format described in
Field lookups below. Multiple parameters are joined via AND in the
underlying SQL statement, and the whole thing is enclosed in a NOT().
This example excludes all entries whose pub_date is later than 2005-1-3
AND whose headline is "Hello":
In SQL terms, that evaluates to:
SELECT ...
WHERE NOT (pub_date > '2005-1-3' AND headline = 'Hello')
This example excludes all entries whose pub_date is later than 2005-1-3
OR whose headline is "Hello":
In SQL terms, that evaluates to:
SELECT ...
WHERE NOT pub_date > '2005-1-3'
AND NOT headline = 'Hello'
Note the second example is more restrictive.
If you need to execute more complex queries (for example, queries with OR statements),
you can use Q objects (*args).
annotate() 
annotate(*args, **kwargs) 
Annotates each object in the QuerySet with the provided list of query
expressions. An expression may be a simple value, a
reference to a field on the model (or any related models), or an aggregate
expression (averages, sums, etc.) that has been computed over the objects that
are related to the objects in the QuerySet.
Each argument to annotate() is an annotation that will be added
to each object in the QuerySet that is returned.
The aggregation functions that are provided by Django are described
in Aggregation Functions below.
Annotations specified using keyword arguments will use the keyword as
the alias for the annotation. Anonymous arguments will have an alias
generated for them based upon the name of the aggregate function and
the model field that is being aggregated. Only aggregate expressions
that reference a single field can be anonymous arguments. Everything
else must be a keyword argument.
For example, if you were manipulating a list of blogs, you may want
to determine how many entries have been made in each blog:
The Blog model doesn't define an entry__count attribute by itself,
but by using a keyword argument to specify the aggregate function, you can
control the name of the annotation:
For an in-depth discussion of aggregation, see the topic guide on
Aggregation.
alias() 
alias(*args, **kwargs) 
New in Django 3.2. 
Same as annotate(), but instead of annotating objects in the
QuerySet, saves the expression for later reuse with other QuerySet
methods. This is useful when the result of the expression itself is not needed
but it is used for filtering, ordering, or as a part of a complex expression.
Not selecting the unused value removes redundant work from the database which
should result in better performance.
For example, if you want to find blogs with more than 5 entries, but are not
interested in the exact number of entries, you could do this:
alias() can be used in conjunction with annotate(), exclude(),
filter(), order_by(), and update(). To use aliased expression
with other methods (e.g. aggregate()), you must promote it to an
annotation:
filter() and order_by() can take expressions directly, but
expression construction and usage often does not happen in the same place (for
example, QuerySet method creates expressions, for later use in views).
alias() allows building complex expressions incrementally, possibly
spanning multiple methods and modules, refer to the expression parts by their
aliases and only use annotate() for the final result.
order_by() 
order_by(*fields) 
By default, results returned by a QuerySet are ordered by the ordering
tuple given by the ordering option in the model's Meta. You can
override this on a per-QuerySet basis by using the order_by method.
Example:
The result above will be ordered by pub_date descending, then by
headline ascending. The negative sign in front of "-pub_date" indicates
descending order. Ascending order is implied. To order randomly, use "?",
like so:
Note: order_by('?') queries may be expensive and slow, depending on the
database backend you're using.
To order by a field in a different model, use the same syntax as when you are
querying across model relations. That is, the name of the field, followed by a
double underscore (__), followed by the name of the field in the new model,
and so on for as many models as you want to join. 
If you try to order by a field that is a relation to another model, Django will
use the default ordering on the related model, or order by the related model's
primary key if there is no Meta.ordering specified. For example, since the Blog
model has no default ordering specified:
…is identical to:
If Blog had ordering = ['name'], then the first queryset would be
identical to:
You can also order by query expressions by
calling asc() or desc() on the
expression:
asc() and desc() have arguments
(nulls_first and nulls_last) that control how null values are sorted.
Be cautious when ordering by fields in related models if you are also using
distinct(). See the note in distinct() for an explanation of how
related model ordering can change the expected results.
Note
It is permissible to specify a multi-valued field to order the results by
(for example, a ManyToManyField field, or the
reverse relation of a ForeignKey field).
Consider this case:
Here, there could potentially be multiple ordering data for each Event;
each Event with multiple children will be returned multiple times
into the new QuerySet that order_by() creates. In other words,
using order_by() on the QuerySet could return more items than you
were working on to begin with - which is probably neither expected nor
useful.
Thus, take care when using multi-valued field to order the results. If
you can be sure that there will only be one ordering piece of data for each
of the items you're ordering, this approach should not present problems. If
not, make sure the results are what you expect.
There's no way to specify whether ordering should be case sensitive. With
respect to case-sensitivity, Django will order results however your database
backend normally orders them.
You can order by a field converted to lowercase with
Lower which will achieve case-consistent
ordering:
If you don't want any ordering to be applied to a query, not even the default
ordering, call order_by() with no parameters.
You can tell if a query is ordered or not by checking the
QuerySet.ordered attribute, which will be True if the
QuerySet has been ordered in any way.
Each order_by() call will clear any previous ordering. For example, this
query will be ordered by pub_date and not headline:
Warning
Ordering is not a free operation. Each field you add to the ordering
incurs a cost to your database. Each foreign key you add will
implicitly include all of its default orderings as well.
If a query doesn't have an ordering specified, results are returned from
the database in an unspecified order. A particular ordering is guaranteed
only when ordering by a set of fields that uniquely identify each object in
the results. For example, if a name field isn't unique, ordering by it
won't guarantee objects with the same name always appear in the same order.
reverse() 
reverse() 
Use the reverse() method to reverse the order in which a queryset's
elements are returned. Calling reverse() a second time restores the
ordering back to the normal direction.
To retrieve the "last" five items in a queryset, you could do this:
Note that this is not quite the same as slicing from the end of a sequence in
Python. The above example will return the last item first, then the
penultimate item and so on. If we had a Python sequence and looked at
seq[-5:], we would see the fifth-last item first. Django doesn't support
that mode of access (slicing from the end), because it's not possible to do it
efficiently in SQL.
Also, note that reverse() should generally only be called on a QuerySet
which has a defined ordering (e.g., when querying against a model which defines
a default ordering, or when using order_by()). If no such ordering is
defined for a given QuerySet, calling reverse() on it has no real
effect (the ordering was undefined prior to calling reverse(), and will
remain undefined afterward).
distinct() 
distinct(*fields) 
Returns a new QuerySet that uses SELECT DISTINCT in its SQL query. This
eliminates duplicate rows from the query results.
By default, a QuerySet will not eliminate duplicate rows. In practice, this
is rarely a problem, because simple queries such as Blog.objects.all()
don't introduce the possibility of duplicate result rows. However, if your
query spans multiple tables, it's possible to get duplicate results when a
QuerySet is evaluated. That's when you'd use distinct().
Note
Any fields used in an order_by() call are included in the SQL
SELECT columns. This can sometimes lead to unexpected results when used
in conjunction with distinct(). If you order by fields from a related
model, those fields will be added to the selected columns and they may make
otherwise duplicate rows appear to be distinct. Since the extra columns
don't appear in the returned results (they are only there to support
ordering), it sometimes looks like non-distinct results are being returned.
Similarly, if you use a values() query to restrict the columns
selected, the columns used in any order_by() (or default model
ordering) will still be involved and may affect uniqueness of the results.
The moral here is that if you are using distinct() be careful about
ordering by related models. Similarly, when using distinct() and
values() together, be careful when ordering by fields not in the
values() call.
On PostgreSQL only, you can pass positional arguments (*fields) in order to
specify the names of fields to which the DISTINCT should apply. This
translates to a SELECT DISTINCT ON SQL query. Here's the difference. For a
normal distinct() call, the database compares each field in each row when
determining which rows are distinct. For a distinct() call with specified
field names, the database will only compare the specified field names.
Note
When you specify field names, you must provide an order_by() in the
QuerySet, and the fields in order_by() must start with the fields in
distinct(), in the same order.
For example, SELECT DISTINCT ON (a) gives you the first row for each
value in column a. If you don't specify an order, you'll get some
arbitrary row.
Examples (those after the first will only work on PostgreSQL):
Note
Keep in mind that order_by() uses any default related model ordering
that has been defined. You might have to explicitly order by the relation
_id or referenced field to make sure the DISTINCT ON expressions
match those at the beginning of the ORDER BY clause. For example, if
the Blog model defined an ordering by
name:
…wouldn't work because the query would be ordered by blog__name thus
mismatching the DISTINCT ON expression. You'd have to explicitly order
by the relation _id field (blog_id in this case) or the referenced
one (blog__pk) to make sure both expressions match.
values() 
values(*fields, **expressions) 
Returns a QuerySet that returns dictionaries, rather than model instances,
when used as an iterable.
Each of those dictionaries represents an object, with the keys corresponding to
the attribute names of model objects.
This example compares the dictionaries of values() with the normal model
objects:
The values() method takes optional positional arguments, *fields, which
specify field names to which the SELECT should be limited. If you specify
the fields, each dictionary will contain only the field keys/values for the
fields you specify. If you don't specify the fields, each dictionary will
contain a key and value for every field in the database table.
Example:
The values() method also takes optional keyword arguments,
**expressions, which are passed through to annotate():
You can use built-in and custom lookups in
ordering. 
An aggregate within a values() clause is applied before other arguments
within the same values() clause. If you need to group by another value,
add it to an earlier values() clause instead. 
A few subtleties that are worth mentioning:
If you have a field called foo that is a
ForeignKey, the default values() call
will return a dictionary key called foo_id, since this is the name
of the hidden model attribute that stores the actual value (the foo
attribute refers to the related model). When you are calling
values() and passing in field names, you can pass in either foo
or foo_id and you will get back the same thing (the dictionary key
will match the field name you passed in).
When using values() together with distinct(), be aware that
ordering can affect the results. See the note in distinct() for
details.
If you use a values() clause after an extra() call,
any fields defined by a select argument in the extra() must
be explicitly included in the values() call. Any extra() call
made after a values() call will have its extra selected fields
ignored.
Calling only() and defer() after values() doesn't make
sense, so doing so will raise a TypeError.
Combining transforms and aggregates requires the use of two annotate()
calls, either explicitly or as keyword arguments to values(). As above,
if the transform has been registered on the relevant field type the first
annotate() can be omitted, thus the following examples are equivalent:
It is useful when you know you're only going to need values from a small number
of the available fields and you won't need the functionality of a model
instance object. It's more efficient to select only the fields you need to use.
Finally, note that you can call filter(), order_by(), etc. after the
values() call, that means that these two calls are identical:
The people who made Django prefer to put all the SQL-affecting methods first,
followed (optionally) by any output-affecting methods (such as values()),
but it doesn't really matter. This is your chance to really flaunt your
individualism.
You can also refer to fields on related models with reverse relations through
OneToOneField, ForeignKey and ManyToManyField attributes:
Warning
Because ManyToManyField attributes and reverse
relations can have multiple related rows, including these can have a
multiplier effect on the size of your result set. This will be especially
pronounced if you include multiple such fields in your values() query,
in which case all possible combinations will be returned.
Boolean values for JSONField on SQLite
Due to the way the JSON_EXTRACT SQL function is implemented on SQLite,
values() will return 1 and 0 instead of True and False
for JSONField key transforms.
values_list() 
values_list(*fields, flat=False, named=False) 
This is similar to values() except that instead of returning dictionaries,
it returns tuples when iterated over. Each tuple contains the value from the
respective field or expression passed into the values_list() call — so the
first item is the first field, etc. 
If you only pass in a single field, you can also pass in the flat
parameter. If True, this will mean the returned results are single values,
rather than one-tuples. An example should make the difference clearer:
It is an error to pass in flat when there is more than one field.
You can pass named=True to get results as a
namedtuple():
Using a named tuple may make use of the results more readable, at the expense
of a small performance penalty for transforming the results into a named tuple.
If you don't pass any values to values_list(), it will return all the
fields in the model, in the order they were declared.
A common need is to get a specific field value of a certain model instance. To
achieve that, use values_list() followed by a get() call:
values() and values_list() are both intended as optimizations for a
specific use case: retrieving a subset of data without the overhead of creating
a model instance. This metaphor falls apart when dealing with many-to-many and
other multivalued relations (such as the one-to-many relation of a reverse
foreign key) because the "one row, one object" assumption doesn't hold.
For example, notice the behavior when querying across a
ManyToManyField:
Authors with multiple entries appear multiple times and authors without any
entries have None for the entry headline.
Similarly, when querying a reverse foreign key, None appears for entries
not having any author:
Boolean values for JSONField on SQLite
Due to the way the JSON_EXTRACT SQL function is implemented on SQLite,
values_list() will return 1 and 0 instead of True and
False for JSONField key transforms.
dates() 
dates(field, kind, order='ASC') 
Returns a QuerySet that evaluates to a list of datetime.date
objects representing all available dates of a particular kind within the
contents of the QuerySet.
field should be the name of a DateField of your model.
kind should be either "year", "month", "week", or "day".
Each datetime.date object in the result list is "truncated" to the
given type.
"year" returns a list of all distinct year values for the field.
"month" returns a list of all distinct year/month values for the
field.
"week" returns a list of all distinct year/week values for the field. All
dates will be a Monday.
"day" returns a list of all distinct year/month/day values for the
field.
order, which defaults to 'ASC', should be either 'ASC' or
'DESC'. This specifies how to order the results.
Examples:
datetimes() 
datetimes(field_name, kind, order='ASC', tzinfo=None, is_dst=None) 
Returns a QuerySet that evaluates to a list of datetime.datetime
objects representing all available dates of a particular kind within the
contents of the QuerySet.
field_name should be the name of a DateTimeField of your model.
kind should be either "year", "month", "week", "day",
"hour", "minute", or "second". Each datetime.datetime
object in the result list is "truncated" to the given type.
order, which defaults to 'ASC', should be either 'ASC' or
'DESC'. This specifies how to order the results.
tzinfo defines the time zone to which datetimes are converted prior to
truncation. Indeed, a given datetime has different representations depending
on the time zone in use. This parameter must be a datetime.tzinfo
object. If it's None, Django uses the current time zone. It has no effect when USE_TZ is
False.
is_dst indicates whether or not pytz should interpret nonexistent and
ambiguous datetimes in daylight saving time. By default (when is_dst=None),
pytz raises an exception for such datetimes.
New in Django 3.1: The is_dst parameter was added.
Note
This function performs time zone conversions directly in the database.
As a consequence, your database must be able to interpret the value of
tzinfo.tzname(None). This translates into the following requirements:
SQLite: no requirements. Conversions are performed in Python with pytz
(installed when you install Django).
PostgreSQL: no requirements (see Time Zones).
Oracle: no requirements (see Choosing a Time Zone File).
MySQL: load the time zone tables with mysql_tzinfo_to_sql.
none() 
none() 
Calling none() will create a queryset that never returns any objects and no
query will be executed when accessing the results. A qs.none() queryset
is an instance of EmptyQuerySet.
Examples:
all() 
all() 
Returns a copy of the current QuerySet (or QuerySet subclass).  This
can be useful in situations where you might want to pass in either a model
manager or a QuerySet and do further filtering on the result. After calling
all() on either object, you'll definitely have a QuerySet to work with.
When a QuerySet is evaluated, it
typically caches its results. If the data in the database might have changed
since a QuerySet was evaluated, you can get updated results for the same
query by calling all() on a previously evaluated QuerySet.
union() 
union(*other_qs, all=False) 
Uses SQL's UNION operator to combine the results of two or more
QuerySets. 
The UNION operator selects only distinct values by default. To allow
duplicate values, use the all=True argument.
union(), intersection(), and difference() return model instances
of the type of the first QuerySet even if the arguments are QuerySets
of other models. Passing different models works as long as the SELECT list
is the same in all QuerySets (at least the types, the names don't matter
as long as the types are in the same order). In such cases, you must use the
column names from the first QuerySet in QuerySet methods applied to the
resulting QuerySet. 
In addition, only LIMIT, OFFSET, COUNT(*), ORDER BY, and
specifying columns (i.e. slicing, count(), exists(),
order_by(), and values()/values_list()) are allowed
on the resulting QuerySet. Further, databases place restrictions on
what operations are allowed in the combined queries. For example, most
databases don't allow LIMIT or OFFSET in the combined queries.
intersection() 
intersection(*other_qs) 
Uses SQL's INTERSECT operator to return the shared elements of two or more
QuerySets. 
See union() for some restrictions.
difference() 
difference(*other_qs) 
Uses SQL's EXCEPT operator to keep only elements present in the
QuerySet but not in some other QuerySets. 
See union() for some restrictions.
select_related() 
select_related(*fields) 
Returns a QuerySet that will "follow" foreign-key relationships, selecting
additional related-object data when it executes its query. This is a
performance booster which results in a single more complex query but means
later use of foreign-key relationships won't require database queries.
The following examples illustrate the difference between plain lookups and
select_related() lookups. Here's standard lookup:
And here's select_related lookup:
You can use select_related() with any queryset of objects:
The order of filter() and select_related() chaining isn't important.
These querysets are equivalent:
You can follow foreign keys in a similar way to querying them. If you have the
following models:
… then a call to Book.objects.select_related('author__hometown').get(id=4)
will cache the related Person and the related City:
You can refer to any ForeignKey or
OneToOneField relation in the list of fields
passed to select_related().
You can also refer to the reverse direction of a
OneToOneField in the list of fields passed to
select_related — that is, you can traverse a
OneToOneField back to the object on which the field
is defined. Instead of specifying the field name, use the related_name for the field on the related object.
There may be some situations where you wish to call select_related() with a
lot of related objects, or where you don't know all of the relations. In these
cases it is possible to call select_related() with no arguments. This will
follow all non-null foreign keys it can find - nullable foreign keys must be
specified. This is not recommended in most cases as it is likely to make the
underlying query more complex, and return more data, than is actually needed.
If you need to clear the list of related fields added by past calls of
select_related on a QuerySet, you can pass None as a parameter:
Chaining select_related calls works in a similar way to other methods -
that is that select_related('foo', 'bar') is equivalent to
select_related('foo').select_related('bar').
prefetch_related() 
prefetch_related(*lookups) 
Returns a QuerySet that will automatically retrieve, in a single batch,
related objects for each of the specified lookups.
This has a similar purpose to select_related, in that both are designed to
stop the deluge of database queries that is caused by accessing related objects,
but the strategy is quite different.
select_related works by creating an SQL join and including the fields of the
related object in the SELECT statement. For this reason, select_related
gets the related objects in the same database query. However, to avoid the much
larger result set that would result from joining across a 'many' relationship,
select_related is limited to single-valued relationships - foreign key and
one-to-one.
prefetch_related, on the other hand, does a separate lookup for each
relationship, and does the 'joining' in Python. This allows it to prefetch
many-to-many and many-to-one objects, which cannot be done using
select_related, in addition to the foreign key and one-to-one relationships
that are supported by select_related. It also supports prefetching of
GenericRelation and
GenericForeignKey, however, it
must be restricted to a homogeneous set of results. For example, prefetching
objects referenced by a GenericForeignKey is only supported if the query
is restricted to one ContentType.
For example, suppose you have these models:
and run:
The problem with this is that every time Pizza.__str__() asks for
self.toppings.all() it has to query the database, so
Pizza.objects.all() will run a query on the Toppings table for every
item in the Pizza QuerySet.
We can reduce to just two queries using prefetch_related:
This implies a self.toppings.all() for each Pizza; now each time
self.toppings.all() is called, instead of having to go to the database for
the items, it will find them in a prefetched QuerySet cache that was
populated in a single query.
That is, all the relevant toppings will have been fetched in a single query,
and used to make QuerySets that have a pre-filled cache of the relevant
results; these QuerySets are then used in the self.toppings.all() calls.
The additional queries in prefetch_related() are executed after the
QuerySet has begun to be evaluated and the primary query has been executed.
If you have an iterable of model instances, you can prefetch related attributes
on those instances using the prefetch_related_objects()
function.
Note that the result cache of the primary QuerySet and all specified related
objects will then be fully loaded into memory. This changes the typical
behavior of QuerySets, which normally try to avoid loading all objects into
memory before they are needed, even after a query has been executed in the
database.
Note
Remember that, as always with QuerySets, any subsequent chained methods
which imply a different database query will ignore previously cached
results, and retrieve data using a fresh database query. So, if you write
the following:
…then the fact that pizza.toppings.all() has been prefetched will not
help you. The prefetch_related('toppings') implied
pizza.toppings.all(), but pizza.toppings.filter() is a new and
different query. The prefetched cache can't help here; in fact it hurts
performance, since you have done a database query that you haven't used. So
use this feature with caution!
Also, if you call the database-altering methods
add(),
remove(),
clear() or
set(), on
related managers,
any prefetched cache for the relation will be cleared.
You can also use the normal join syntax to do related fields of related
fields. Suppose we have an additional model to the example above:
The following are all legal:
This will prefetch all pizzas belonging to restaurants, and all toppings
belonging to those pizzas. This will result in a total of 3 database queries -
one for the restaurants, one for the pizzas, and one for the toppings.
This will fetch the best pizza and all the toppings for the best pizza for each
restaurant. This will be done in 3 database queries - one for the restaurants,
one for the 'best pizzas', and one for the toppings.
The best_pizza relationship could also be fetched using select_related
to reduce the query count to 2:
Since the prefetch is executed after the main query (which includes the joins
needed by select_related), it is able to detect that the best_pizza
objects have already been fetched, and it will skip fetching them again.
Chaining prefetch_related calls will accumulate the lookups that are
prefetched. To clear any prefetch_related behavior, pass None as a
parameter:
One difference to note when using prefetch_related is that objects created
by a query can be shared between the different objects that they are related to
i.e. a single Python model instance can appear at more than one point in the
tree of objects that are returned. This will normally happen with foreign key
relationships. Typically this behavior will not be a problem, and will in fact
save both memory and CPU time.
While prefetch_related supports prefetching GenericForeignKey
relationships, the number of queries will depend on the data. Since a
GenericForeignKey can reference data in multiple tables, one query per table
referenced is needed, rather than one query for all the items. There could be
additional queries on the ContentType table if the relevant rows have not
already been fetched.
prefetch_related in most cases will be implemented using an SQL query that
uses the 'IN' operator. This means that for a large QuerySet a large 'IN' clause
could be generated, which, depending on the database, might have performance
problems of its own when it comes to parsing or executing the SQL query. Always
profile for your use case!
Note that if you use iterator() to run the query, prefetch_related()
calls will be ignored since these two optimizations do not make sense together.
You can use the Prefetch object to further control
the prefetch operation.
In its simplest form Prefetch is equivalent to the traditional string based
lookups:
You can provide a custom queryset with the optional queryset argument.
This can be used to change the default ordering of the queryset:
...     Prefetch('pizzas__toppings', queryset=Toppings.objects.order_by('name')))
Or to call select_related() when
applicable to reduce the number of queries even further:
...     Prefetch('restaurants', queryset=Restaurant.objects.select_related('best_pizza')))
You can also assign the prefetched result to a custom attribute with the optional
to_attr argument. The result will be stored directly in a list.
This allows prefetching the same relation multiple times with a different
QuerySet; for instance:
...     Prefetch('pizzas', to_attr='menu'),
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=vegetarian_pizzas, to_attr='vegetarian_menu'))
Lookups created with custom to_attr can still be traversed as usual by other
lookups:
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=vegetarian_pizzas, to_attr='vegetarian_menu'),
...     'vegetarian_menu__toppings')
Using to_attr is recommended when filtering down the prefetch result as it is
less ambiguous than storing a filtered result in the related manager's cache:
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=queryset, to_attr='vegetarian_pizzas'))
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=queryset))
Custom prefetching also works with single related relations like
forward ForeignKey or OneToOneField. Generally you'll want to use
select_related() for these relations, but there are a number of cases
where prefetching with a custom QuerySet is useful:
You want to use a QuerySet that performs further prefetching
on related models.
You want to prefetch only a subset of the related objects.
You want to use performance optimization techniques like
deferred fields:
...     Prefetch('best_pizza', queryset=queryset))
When using multiple databases, Prefetch will respect your choice of
database. If the inner query does not specify a database, it will use the
database selected by the outer query. All of the following are valid:
Note
The ordering of lookups matters.
Take the following examples:
This works even though it's unordered because 'pizzas__toppings'
already contains all the needed information, therefore the second argument
'pizzas' is actually redundant.
This will raise a ValueError because of the attempt to redefine the
queryset of a previously seen lookup. Note that an implicit queryset was
created to traverse 'pizzas' as part of the 'pizzas__toppings'
lookup.
This will trigger an AttributeError because 'pizza_list' doesn't exist yet
when 'pizza_list__toppings' is being processed.
This consideration is not limited to the use of Prefetch objects. Some
advanced techniques may require that the lookups be performed in a
specific order to avoid creating extra queries; therefore it's recommended
to always carefully order prefetch_related arguments.
extra() 
extra(select=None, where=None, params=None, tables=None, order_by=None, select_params=None) 
Sometimes, the Django query syntax by itself can't easily express a complex
WHERE clause. For these edge cases, Django provides the extra()
QuerySet modifier — a hook for injecting specific clauses into the SQL
generated by a QuerySet.
Use this method as a last resort
This is an old API that we aim to deprecate at some point in the future.
Use it only if you cannot express your query using other queryset methods.
If you do need to use it, please file a ticket using the QuerySet.extra
keyword
with your use case (please check the list of existing tickets first) so
that we can enhance the QuerySet API to allow removing extra(). We are
no longer improving or fixing bugs for this method.
For example, this use of extra():
is equivalent to:
The main benefit of using RawSQL is
that you can set output_field if needed. The main downside is that if
you refer to some table alias of the queryset in the raw SQL, then it is
possible that Django might change that alias (for example, when the
queryset is used as a subquery in yet another query).
Warning
You should be very careful whenever you use extra(). Every time you use
it, you should escape any parameters that the user can control by using
params in order to protect against SQL injection attacks.
You also must not quote placeholders in the SQL string. This example is
vulnerable to SQL injection because of the quotes around %s:
SELECT col FROM sometable WHERE othercol = '%s'  # unsafe!
You can read more about how Django's SQL injection protection works.
By definition, these extra lookups may not be portable to different database
engines (because you're explicitly writing SQL code) and violate the DRY
principle, so you should avoid them if possible.
Specify one or more of params, select, where or tables. None
of the arguments is required, but you should use at least one of them.
select
The select argument lets you put extra fields in the SELECT
clause.  It should be a dictionary mapping attribute names to SQL
clauses to use to calculate that attribute.
Example:
As a result, each Entry object will have an extra attribute,
is_recent, a boolean representing whether the entry's pub_date
is greater than Jan. 1, 2006.
Django inserts the given SQL snippet directly into the SELECT
statement, so the resulting SQL of the above example would be something like:
SELECT blog_entry.*, (pub_date > '2006-01-01') AS is_recent
FROM blog_entry;
The next example is more advanced; it does a subquery to give each
resulting Blog object an entry_count attribute, an integer count
of associated Entry objects:
In this particular case, we're exploiting the fact that the query will
already contain the blog_blog table in its FROM clause.
The resulting SQL of the above example would be:
SELECT blog_blog.*, (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM blog_entry WHERE blog_entry.blog_id = blog_blog.id) AS entry_count
FROM blog_blog;
Note that the parentheses required by most database engines around
subqueries are not required in Django's select clauses. Also note
that some database backends, such as some MySQL versions, don't support
subqueries.
In some rare cases, you might wish to pass parameters to the SQL
fragments in extra(select=...). For this purpose, use the
select_params parameter.
This will work, for example:
If you need to use a literal %s inside your select string, use
the sequence %%s.
where / tables
You can define explicit SQL WHERE clauses — perhaps to perform
non-explicit joins — by using where. You can manually add tables to
the SQL FROM clause by using tables.
where and tables both take a list of strings. All where
parameters are "AND"ed to any other search criteria.
Example:
…translates (roughly) into the following SQL:
SELECT * FROM blog_entry WHERE (foo='a' OR bar='a') AND (baz='a')
Be careful when using the tables parameter if you're specifying
tables that are already used in the query. When you add extra tables
via the tables parameter, Django assumes you want that table
included an extra time, if it is already included. That creates a
problem, since the table name will then be given an alias. If a table
appears multiple times in an SQL statement, the second and subsequent
occurrences must use aliases so the database can tell them apart. If
you're referring to the extra table you added in the extra where
parameter this is going to cause errors.
Normally you'll only be adding extra tables that don't already appear
in the query. However, if the case outlined above does occur, there are
a few solutions. First, see if you can get by without including the
extra table and use the one already in the query. If that isn't
possible, put your extra() call at the front of the queryset
construction so that your table is the first use of that table.
Finally, if all else fails, look at the query produced and rewrite your
where addition to use the alias given to your extra table. The
alias will be the same each time you construct the queryset in the same
way, so you can rely upon the alias name to not change.
order_by
If you need to order the resulting queryset using some of the new
fields or tables you have included via extra() use the order_by
parameter to extra() and pass in a sequence of strings. These
strings should either be model fields (as in the normal
order_by() method on querysets), of the form
table_name.column_name or an alias for a column that you specified
in the select parameter to extra().
This would sort all the items for which is_recent is true to the
front of the result set (True sorts before False in a
descending ordering).
This shows, by the way, that you can make multiple calls to extra()
and it will behave as you expect (adding new constraints each time).
params
The where parameter described above may use standard Python
database string placeholders — '%s' to indicate parameters the
database engine should automatically quote. The params argument is
a list of any extra parameters to be substituted.
Example:
Always use params instead of embedding values directly into
where because params will ensure values are quoted correctly
according to your particular backend. For example, quotes will be
escaped correctly.
Bad:
Good:
Warning
If you are performing queries on MySQL, note that MySQL's silent type coercion
may cause unexpected results when mixing types. If you query on a string
type column, but with an integer value, MySQL will coerce the types of all values
in the table to an integer before performing the comparison. For example, if your
table contains the values 'abc', 'def' and you query for WHERE mycolumn=0,
both rows will match. To prevent this, perform the correct typecasting
before using the value in a query.
defer() 
defer(*fields) 
In some complex data-modeling situations, your models might contain a lot of
fields, some of which could contain a lot of data (for example, text fields),
or require expensive processing to convert them to Python objects. If you are
using the results of a queryset in some situation where you don't know
if you need those particular fields when you initially fetch the data, you can
tell Django not to retrieve them from the database.
This is done by passing the names of the fields to not load to defer():
A queryset that has deferred fields will still return model instances. Each
deferred field will be retrieved from the database if you access that field
(one at a time, not all the deferred fields at once).
You can make multiple calls to defer(). Each call adds new fields to the
deferred set:
The order in which fields are added to the deferred set does not matter.
Calling defer() with a field name that has already been deferred is
harmless (the field will still be deferred).
You can defer loading of fields in related models (if the related models are
loading via select_related()) by using the standard double-underscore
notation to separate related fields:
If you want to clear the set of deferred fields, pass None as a parameter
to defer():
Some fields in a model won't be deferred, even if you ask for them. You can
never defer the loading of the primary key. If you are using
select_related() to retrieve related models, you shouldn't defer the
loading of the field that connects from the primary model to the related
one, doing so will result in an error.
Note
The defer() method (and its cousin, only(), below) are only for
advanced use-cases. They provide an optimization for when you have analyzed
your queries closely and understand exactly what information you need and
have measured that the difference between returning the fields you need and
the full set of fields for the model will be significant.
Even if you think you are in the advanced use-case situation, only use
defer() when you cannot, at queryset load time, determine if you will need
the extra fields or not. If you are frequently loading and using a
particular subset of your data, the best choice you can make is to
normalize your models and put the non-loaded data into a separate model
(and database table). If the columns must stay in the one table for some
reason, create a model with Meta.managed = False (see the
managed attribute documentation)
containing just the fields you normally need to load and use that where you
might otherwise call defer(). This makes your code more explicit to the
reader, is slightly faster and consumes a little less memory in the Python
process.
For example, both of these models use the same underlying database table:
If many fields need to be duplicated in the unmanaged model, it may be best
to create an abstract model with the shared fields and then have the
unmanaged and managed models inherit from the abstract model.
Note
When calling save() for instances with
deferred fields, only the loaded fields will be saved. See
save() for more details.
only() 
only(*fields) 
The only() method is more or less the opposite of defer(). You call
it with the fields that should not be deferred when retrieving a model.  If
you have a model where almost all the fields need to be deferred, using
only() to specify the complementary set of fields can result in simpler
code.
Suppose you have a model with fields name, age and biography. The
following two querysets are the same, in terms of deferred fields:
Whenever you call only() it replaces the set of fields to load
immediately. The method's name is mnemonic: only those fields are loaded
immediately; the remainder are deferred. Thus, successive calls to only()
result in only the final fields being considered:
Since defer() acts incrementally (adding fields to the deferred list), you
can combine calls to only() and defer() and things will behave
logically:
All of the cautions in the note for the defer() documentation apply to
only() as well. Use it cautiously and only after exhausting your other
options.
Using only() and omitting a field requested using select_related()
is an error as well.
Note
When calling save() for instances with
deferred fields, only the loaded fields will be saved. See
save() for more details.
using() 
using(alias) 
This method is for controlling which database the QuerySet will be
evaluated against if you are using more than one database.  The only argument
this method takes is the alias of a database, as defined in
DATABASES.
select_for_update() 
select_for_update(nowait=False, skip_locked=False, of=(), no_key=False) 
Returns a queryset that will lock rows until the end of the transaction,
generating a SELECT ... FOR UPDATE SQL statement on supported databases.
When the queryset is evaluated (for entry in entries in this case), all
matched entries will be locked until the end of the transaction block, meaning
that other transactions will be prevented from changing or acquiring locks on
them.
Usually, if another transaction has already acquired a lock on one of the
selected rows, the query will block until the lock is released. If this is
not the behavior you want, call select_for_update(nowait=True). This will
make the call non-blocking. If a conflicting lock is already acquired by
another transaction, DatabaseError will be raised when the
queryset is evaluated. You can also ignore locked rows by using
select_for_update(skip_locked=True) instead. The nowait and
skip_locked are mutually exclusive and attempts to call
select_for_update() with both options enabled will result in a
ValueError.
By default, select_for_update() locks all rows that are selected by the
query. For example, rows of related objects specified in select_related()
are locked in addition to rows of the queryset's model. If this isn't desired,
specify the related objects you want to lock in select_for_update(of=(...))
using the same fields syntax as select_related(). Use the value 'self'
to refer to the queryset's model.
Lock parents models in select_for_update(of=(...))
If you want to lock parents models when using multi-table inheritance, you must specify parent link fields (by default
<parent_model_name>_ptr) in the of argument. 
On PostgreSQL only, you can pass no_key=True in order to acquire a weaker
lock, that still allows creating rows that merely reference locked rows
(through a foreign key, for example) while the lock is in place. The
PostgreSQL documentation has more details about row-level lock modes.
You can't use select_for_update() on nullable relations:
To avoid that restriction, you can exclude null objects if you don't care about
them:
Currently, the postgresql, oracle, and mysql database
backends support select_for_update(). However, MariaDB 10.3+ supports only
the nowait argument and MySQL 8.0.1+ supports the nowait,
skip_locked, and of arguments. The no_key argument is supported
only on PostgreSQL.
Passing nowait=True, skip_locked=True, no_key=True, or of to
select_for_update() using database backends that do not support these
options, such as MySQL, raises a NotSupportedError. This
prevents code from unexpectedly blocking.
Evaluating a queryset with select_for_update() in autocommit mode on
backends which support SELECT ... FOR UPDATE is a
TransactionManagementError error because the
rows are not locked in that case. If allowed, this would facilitate data
corruption and could easily be caused by calling code that expects to be run in
a transaction outside of one.
Using select_for_update() on backends which do not support
SELECT ... FOR UPDATE (such as SQLite) will have no effect.
SELECT ... FOR UPDATE will not be added to the query, and an error isn't
raised if select_for_update() is used in autocommit mode.
Warning
Although select_for_update() normally fails in autocommit mode, since
TestCase automatically wraps each test in a
transaction, calling select_for_update() in a TestCase even outside
an atomic() block will (perhaps unexpectedly)
pass without raising a TransactionManagementError. To properly test
select_for_update() you should use
TransactionTestCase.
Certain expressions may not be supported
PostgreSQL doesn't support select_for_update() with
Window expressions.
Changed in Django 3.2: The no_key argument was added.
The of argument was allowed on MySQL 8.0.1+.
raw() 
raw(raw_query, params=(), translations=None, using=None) 
Takes a raw SQL query, executes it, and returns a
django.db.models.query.RawQuerySet instance. This RawQuerySet instance
can be iterated over just like a normal QuerySet to provide object
instances.
See the Performing raw SQL queries for more information.
Warning
raw() always triggers a new query and doesn't account for previous
filtering. As such, it should generally be called from the Manager or
from a fresh QuerySet instance.
Changed in Django 3.2: The default value of the params argument was changed from None to
an empty tuple.
Operators that return new QuerySets 
Combined querysets must use the same model.
AND (&) 
Combines two QuerySets using the SQL AND operator.
The following are equivalent:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE x=1 AND y=2
OR (|) 
Combines two QuerySets using the SQL OR operator.
The following are equivalent:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE x=1 OR y=2
Methods that do not return QuerySets 
The following QuerySet methods evaluate the QuerySet and return
something other than a QuerySet.
These methods do not use a cache (see Caching and QuerySets). Rather,
they query the database each time they're called.
get() 
get(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns the object matching the given lookup parameters, which should be in
the format described in Field lookups. You should use lookups that are
guaranteed unique, such as the primary key or fields in a unique constraint.
If you expect a queryset to already return one row, you can use get()
without any arguments to return the object for that row:
If get() doesn't find any object, it raises a Model.DoesNotExist exception:
If get() finds more than one object, it raises a
Model.MultipleObjectsReturned exception:
Both these exception classes are attributes of the model class, and specific to
that model. If you want to handle such exceptions from several get() calls
for different models, you can use their generic base classes. For example, you
can use django.core.exceptions.ObjectDoesNotExist  to handle
DoesNotExist exceptions from multiple models:
create() 
create(**kwargs) 
A convenience method for creating an object and saving it all in one step.  Thus:
and:
are equivalent.
The force_insert parameter is documented
elsewhere, but all it means is that a new object will always be created.
Normally you won't need to worry about this. However, if your model contains a
manual primary key value that you set and if that value already exists in the
database, a call to create() will fail with an
IntegrityError since primary keys must be unique. Be
prepared to handle the exception if you are using manual primary keys.
get_or_create() 
get_or_create(defaults=None, **kwargs) 
A convenience method for looking up an object with the given kwargs (may be
empty if your model has defaults for all fields), creating one if necessary.
Returns a tuple of (object, created), where object is the retrieved or
created object and created is a boolean specifying whether a new object was
created.
This is meant to prevent duplicate objects from being created when requests are
made in parallel, and as a shortcut to boilerplatish code. 
Here, with concurrent requests, multiple attempts to save a Person with
the same parameters may be made. To avoid this race condition, the above
example can be rewritten using get_or_create() like so:
Any keyword arguments passed to get_or_create() — except an optional one
called defaults — will be used in a get() call. If an object is
found, get_or_create() returns a tuple of that object and False.
Warning
This method is atomic assuming that the database enforces uniqueness of the
keyword arguments (see unique or
unique_together). If the fields used in the
keyword arguments do not have a uniqueness constraint, concurrent calls to
this method may result in multiple rows with the same parameters being
inserted.
You can specify more complex conditions for the retrieved object by chaining
get_or_create() with filter() and using Q objects. For example, to retrieve Robert or Bob Marley if either
exists, and create the latter otherwise:
If multiple objects are found, get_or_create() raises
MultipleObjectsReturned. If an object is not
found, get_or_create() will instantiate and save a new object, returning a
tuple of the new object and True. The new object will be created roughly
according to this algorithm:
In English, that means start with any non-'defaults' keyword argument that
doesn't contain a double underscore (which would indicate a non-exact lookup).
Then add the contents of defaults, overriding any keys if necessary, and
use the result as the keyword arguments to the model class. If there are any
callables in defaults, evaluate them. As hinted at above, this is a
simplification of the algorithm that is used, but it contains all the pertinent
details. The internal implementation has some more error-checking than this and
handles some extra edge-conditions; if you're interested, read the code.
If you have a field named defaults and want to use it as an exact lookup in
get_or_create(), use 'defaults__exact', like so:
The get_or_create() method has similar error behavior to create()
when you're using manually specified primary keys. If an object needs to be
created and the key already exists in the database, an
IntegrityError will be raised.
Finally, a word on using get_or_create() in Django views. Please make sure
to use it only in POST requests unless you have a good reason not to.
GET requests shouldn't have any effect on data. Instead, use POST
whenever a request to a page has a side effect on your data. For more, see
Safe methods in the HTTP spec.
Warning
You can use get_or_create() through ManyToManyField
attributes and reverse relations. In that case you will restrict the queries
inside the context of that relation. That could lead you to some integrity
problems if you don't use it consistently.
Being the following models:
You can use get_or_create() through Book's chapters field, but it only
fetches inside the context of that book:
This is happening because it's trying to get or create "Chapter 1" through the
book "Ulysses", but it can't do any of them: the relation can't fetch that
chapter because it isn't related to that book, but it can't create it either
because title field should be unique.
update_or_create() 
update_or_create(defaults=None, **kwargs) 
A convenience method for updating an object with the given kwargs, creating
a new one if necessary. The defaults is a dictionary of (field, value)
pairs used to update the object. The values in defaults can be callables.
Returns a tuple of (object, created), where object is the created or
updated object and created is a boolean specifying whether a new object was
created.
The update_or_create method tries to fetch an object from database based on
the given kwargs. If a match is found, it updates the fields passed in the
defaults dictionary.
This is meant as a shortcut to boilerplatish code. 
This pattern gets quite unwieldy as the number of fields in a model goes up.
The above example can be rewritten using update_or_create() like so:
For a detailed description of how names passed in kwargs are resolved, see
get_or_create().
As described above in get_or_create(), this method is prone to a
race-condition which can result in multiple rows being inserted simultaneously
if uniqueness is not enforced at the database level.
Like get_or_create() and create(), if you're using manually
specified primary keys and an object needs to be created but the key already
exists in the database, an IntegrityError is raised.
bulk_create() 
bulk_create(objs, batch_size=None, ignore_conflicts=False) 
This method inserts the provided list of objects into the database in an
efficient manner (generally only 1 query, no matter how many objects there
are), and returns created objects as a list, in the same order as provided:
This has a number of caveats though:
The model's save() method will not be called, and the pre_save and
post_save signals will not be sent.
It does not work with child models in a multi-table inheritance scenario.
If the model's primary key is an AutoField, the
primary key attribute can only be retrieved on certain databases (currently
PostgreSQL and MariaDB 10.5+). On other databases, it will not be set.
It does not work with many-to-many relationships.
It casts objs to a list, which fully evaluates objs if it's a
generator. The cast allows inspecting all objects so that any objects with a
manually set primary key can be inserted first. If you want to insert objects
in batches without evaluating the entire generator at once, you can use this
technique as long as the objects don't have any manually set primary keys:
The batch_size parameter controls how many objects are created in a single
query. The default is to create all objects in one batch, except for SQLite
where the default is such that at most 999 variables per query are used.
On databases that support it (all but Oracle), setting the ignore_conflicts
parameter to True tells the database to ignore failure to insert any rows
that fail constraints such as duplicate unique values. Enabling this parameter
disables setting the primary key on each model instance (if the database
normally supports it).
Warning
On MySQL and MariaDB, setting the ignore_conflicts parameter to
True turns certain types of errors, other than duplicate key, into
warnings. Even with Strict Mode.  invalid values or
non-nullable violations. See the MySQL documentation and
MariaDB documentation for more details.
Changed in Django 3.1: Support for the fetching primary key attributes on MariaDB 10.5+ was added.
bulk_update() 
bulk_update(objs, fields, batch_size=None) 
This method efficiently updates the given fields on the provided model
instances, generally with one query:
QuerySet.update() is used to save the changes, so this is more efficient
than iterating through the list of models and calling save() on each of
them, but it has a few caveats:
You cannot update the model's primary key.
Each model's save() method isn't called, and the
pre_save and
post_save signals aren't sent.
If updating a large number of columns in a large number of rows, the SQL
generated can be very large. Avoid this by specifying a suitable
batch_size.
Updating fields defined on multi-table inheritance ancestors will incur an
extra query per ancestor.
When an individual batch contains duplicates, only the first instance in that
batch will result in an update.
The batch_size parameter controls how many objects are saved in a single
query. The default is to update all objects in one batch, except for SQLite
and Oracle which have restrictions on the number of variables used in a query.
count() 
count() 
Returns an integer representing the number of objects in the database matching
the QuerySet.
Example:
A count() call performs a SELECT COUNT(*) behind the scenes, so you
should always use count() rather than loading all of the record into Python
objects and calling len() on the result (unless you need to load the
objects into memory anyway, in which case len() will be faster).
Note that if you want the number of items in a QuerySet and are also
retrieving model instances from it (for example, by iterating over it), it's
probably more efficient to use len(queryset) which won't cause an extra
database query like count() would.
If the queryset has already been fully retrieved, count() will use that
length rather than perform an extra database query.
in_bulk() 
in_bulk(id_list=None, *, field_name='pk') 
Takes a list of field values (id_list) and the field_name for those
values, and returns a dictionary mapping each value to an instance of the
object with the given field value. No
django.core.exceptions.ObjectDoesNotExist exceptions will ever be raised
by in_bulk; that is, any id_list value not matching any instance will
simply be ignored. If id_list isn't provided, all objects
in the queryset are returned. field_name must be a unique field or a
distinct field (if there's only one field specified in distinct()).
field_name defaults to the primary key.
Example:
If you pass in_bulk() an empty list, you'll get an empty dictionary.
Changed in Django 3.2: Using a distinct field was allowed.
iterator() 
iterator(chunk_size=2000) 
Evaluates the QuerySet (by performing the query) and returns an iterator
(see PEP 234) over the results. A QuerySet typically caches its results
internally so that repeated evaluations do not result in additional queries. In
contrast, iterator() will read results directly, without doing any caching
at the QuerySet level (internally, the default iterator calls iterator()
and caches the return value). For a QuerySet which returns a large number of
objects that you only need to access once, this can result in better
performance and a significant reduction in memory.
Note that using iterator() on a QuerySet which has already been
evaluated will force it to evaluate again, repeating the query.
Also, use of iterator() causes previous prefetch_related() calls to be
ignored since these two optimizations do not make sense together.
Depending on the database backend, query results will either be loaded all at
once or streamed from the database using server-side cursors.
With server-side cursors 
Oracle and PostgreSQL use server-side
cursors to stream results from the database without loading the entire result
set into memory.
The Oracle database driver always uses server-side cursors.
With server-side cursors, the chunk_size parameter specifies the number of
results to cache at the database driver level. Fetching bigger chunks
diminishes the number of round trips between the database driver and the
database, at the expense of memory.
On PostgreSQL, server-side cursors will only be used when the
DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS
setting is False. Read Transaction pooling and server-side cursors if
you're using a connection pooler configured in transaction pooling mode. When
server-side cursors are disabled, the behavior is the same as databases that
don't support server-side cursors.
Without server-side cursors 
MySQL doesn't support streaming results, hence the Python database driver loads
the entire result set into memory. The result set is then transformed into
Python row objects by the database adapter using the fetchmany() method
defined in PEP 249.
SQLite can fetch results in batches using fetchmany(), but since SQLite
doesn't provide isolation between queries within a connection, be careful when
writing to the table being iterated over. See Isolation when using QuerySet.iterator() for
more information.
The chunk_size parameter controls the size of batches Django retrieves from
the database driver. Larger batches decrease the overhead of communicating with
the database driver at the expense of a slight increase in memory consumption.
The default value of chunk_size, 2000, comes from a calculation on the
psycopg mailing list:
Assuming rows of 10-20 columns with a mix of textual and numeric data, 2000
is going to fetch less than 100KB of data, which seems a good compromise
between the number of rows transferred and the data discarded if the loop
is exited early.
latest() 
latest(*fields) 
Returns the latest object in the table based on the given field(s).
This example returns the latest Entry in the table, according to the
pub_date field:
You can also choose the latest based on several fields. For example, to select
the Entry with the earliest expire_date when two entries have the same
pub_date:
The negative sign in '-expire_date' means to sort expire_date in
descending order. Since latest() gets the last result, the Entry with
the earliest expire_date is selected.
If your model's Meta specifies
get_latest_by, you can omit any arguments to
earliest() or latest(). The fields specified in
get_latest_by will be used by default.
Like get(), earliest() and latest() raise
DoesNotExist if there is no object with the
given parameters.
Note that earliest() and latest() exist purely for convenience and
readability.
earliest() and latest() may return instances with null dates.
Since ordering is delegated to the database, results on fields that allow
null values may be ordered differently if you use different databases. For
example, PostgreSQL and MySQL sort null values as if they are higher than
non-null values, while SQLite does the opposite.
You may want to filter out null values:
earliest() 
earliest(*fields) 
Works otherwise like latest() except
the direction is changed.
first() 
first() 
Returns the first object matched by the queryset, or None if there
is no matching object. If the QuerySet has no ordering defined, then the
queryset is automatically ordered by the primary key. This can affect
aggregation results as described in Interaction with order_by().
Example:
Note that first() is a convenience method, the following code sample is
equivalent to the above example:
last() 
last() 
Works like  first(), but returns the last object in the queryset.
aggregate() 
aggregate(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns a dictionary of aggregate values (averages, sums, etc.) calculated over
the QuerySet. Each argument to aggregate() specifies a value that will
be included in the dictionary that is returned.
The aggregation functions that are provided by Django are described in
Aggregation Functions below. Since aggregates are also query
expressions, you may combine aggregates with other
aggregates or values to create complex aggregates.
Aggregates specified using keyword arguments will use the keyword as the name
for the annotation. Anonymous arguments will have a name generated for them
based upon the name of the aggregate function and the model field that is being
aggregated. Complex aggregates cannot use anonymous arguments and must specify
a keyword argument as an alias.
For example, when you are working with blog entries, you may want to know the
number of authors that have contributed blog entries:
By using a keyword argument to specify the aggregate function, you can
control the name of the aggregation value that is returned:
For an in-depth discussion of aggregation, see the topic guide on
Aggregation.
exists() 
exists() 
Returns True if the QuerySet contains any results, and False
if not. This tries to perform the query in the simplest and fastest way
possible, but it does execute nearly the same query as a normal
QuerySet query.
exists() is useful for searches relating to both
object membership in a QuerySet and to the existence of any objects in
a QuerySet, particularly in the context of a large QuerySet.
The most efficient method of finding whether a model with a unique field
(e.g. primary_key) is a member of a QuerySet is:
Which will be faster than the following which requires evaluating and iterating
through the entire queryset:
And to find whether a queryset contains any items:
Which will be faster than:
… but not by a large degree (hence needing a large queryset for efficiency
gains).
Additionally, if a some_queryset has not yet been evaluated, but you know
that it will be at some point, then using some_queryset.exists() will do
more overall work (one query for the existence check plus an extra one to later
retrieve the results) than using bool(some_queryset), which retrieves the
results and then checks if any were returned.
update() 
update(**kwargs) 
Performs an SQL update query for the specified fields, and returns
the number of rows matched (which may not be equal to the number of rows
updated if some rows already have the new value).
For example, to turn comments off for all blog entries published in 2010,
you could do this:
(This assumes your Entry model has fields pub_date and comments_on.)
You can update multiple fields — there's no limit on how many. For example,
here we update the comments_on and headline fields:
The update() method is applied instantly, and the only restriction on the
QuerySet that is updated is that it can only update columns in the
model's main table, not on related models. You can't do this, for example:
Filtering based on related fields is still possible, though:
You cannot call update() on a QuerySet that has had a slice taken
or can otherwise no longer be filtered.
The update() method returns the number of affected rows:
If you're just updating a record and don't need to do anything with the model
object, the most efficient approach is to call update(), rather than
loading the model object into memory. For example, instead of doing this:
…do this:
Using update() also prevents a race condition wherein something might
change in your database in the short period of time between loading the object
and calling save().
Finally, realize that update() does an update at the SQL level and, thus,
does not call any save() methods on your models, nor does it emit the
pre_save or
post_save signals (which are a consequence of
calling Model.save()). If you want to
update a bunch of records for a model that has a custom
save() method, loop over them and call
save(), like this:
Ordered queryset 
New in Django 3.2. 
Chaining order_by() with update() is supported only on MariaDB and
MySQL, and is ignored for different databases. This is useful for updating a
unique field in the order that is specified without conflicts. 
Note
order_by() clause will be ignored if it contains annotations, inherited
fields, or lookups spanning relations.
delete() 
delete() 
Performs an SQL delete query on all rows in the QuerySet and
returns the number of objects deleted and a dictionary with the number of
deletions per object type.
The delete() is applied instantly. You cannot call delete() on a
QuerySet that has had a slice taken or can otherwise no longer be
filtered.
For example, to delete all the entries in a particular blog:
By default, Django's ForeignKey emulates the SQL
constraint ON DELETE CASCADE — in other words, any objects with foreign
keys pointing at the objects to be deleted will be deleted along with them.
This cascade behavior is customizable via the
on_delete argument to the
ForeignKey.
The delete() method does a bulk delete and does not call any delete()
methods on your models. It does, however, emit the
pre_delete and
post_delete signals for all deleted objects
(including cascaded deletions).
Django needs to fetch objects into memory to send signals and handle cascades.
However, if there are no cascades and no signals, then Django may take a
fast-path and delete objects without fetching into memory. For large
deletes this can result in significantly reduced memory usage. The amount of
executed queries can be reduced, too.
ForeignKeys which are set to on_delete
DO_NOTHING do not prevent taking the fast-path in deletion.
Note that the queries generated in object deletion is an implementation
detail subject to change.
as_manager() 
classmethod as_manager() 
Class method that returns an instance of Manager
with a copy of the QuerySet's methods. See
Creating a manager with QuerySet methods for more details.
explain() 
explain(format=None, **options) 
Returns a string of the QuerySet's execution plan, which details how the
database would execute the query, including any indexes or joins that would be
used. Knowing these details may help you improve the performance of slow
queries.
For example, when using PostgreSQL:
The output differs significantly between databases.
explain() is supported by all built-in database backends except Oracle
because an implementation there isn't straightforward.
The format parameter changes the output format from the databases's
default, which is usually text-based. PostgreSQL supports 'TEXT',
'JSON', 'YAML', and 'XML' formats. MariaDB and MySQL support
'TEXT' (also called 'TRADITIONAL') and 'JSON' formats. MySQL
8.0.16+ also supports an improved 'TREE' format, which is similar to
PostgreSQL's 'TEXT' output and is used by default, if supported.
Some databases accept flags that can return more information about the query.
Pass these flags as keyword arguments. For example, when using PostgreSQL:
On some databases, flags may cause the query to be executed which could have
adverse effects on your database. For example, the ANALYZE flag supported
by MariaDB, MySQL 8.0.18+, and PostgreSQL could result in changes to data if
there are triggers or if a function is called, even for a SELECT query.
Changed in Django 3.1: Support for the 'TREE' format on MySQL 8.0.16+ and analyze option
on MariaDB and MySQL 8.0.18+ were added.
Field lookups 
Field lookups are how you specify the meat of an SQL WHERE clause. They're
specified as keyword arguments to the QuerySet methods filter(),
exclude() and get().
For an introduction, see models and database queries documentation.
Django's built-in lookups are listed below. It is also possible to write
custom lookups for model fields.
As a convenience when no lookup type is provided (like in
Entry.objects.get(id=14)) the lookup type is assumed to be exact.
exact 
Exact match. If the value provided for comparison is None, it will be
interpreted as an SQL NULL (see isnull for more details).
Examples:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE id = 14;
SELECT ... WHERE id IS NULL;
MySQL comparisons
In MySQL, a database table's "collation" setting determines whether
exact comparisons are case-sensitive. This is a database setting, not
a Django setting. It's possible to configure your MySQL tables to use
case-sensitive comparisons, but some trade-offs are involved. For more
information about this, see the collation section
in the databases documentation.
iexact 
Case-insensitive exact match. If the value provided for comparison is None,
it will be interpreted as an SQL NULL (see isnull for more
details).
Example:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE name ILIKE 'beatles blog';
SELECT ... WHERE name IS NULL;
Note the first query will match 'Beatles Blog', 'beatles blog',
'BeAtLes BLoG', etc.
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
SQLite does not do case-insensitive matching for non-ASCII strings.
contains 
Case-sensitive containment test.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline LIKE '%Lennon%';
Note this will match the headline 'Lennon honored today' but not 'lennon
honored today'.
SQLite users
SQLite doesn't support case-sensitive LIKE statements; contains
acts like icontains for SQLite. See the database note for more information.
icontains 
Case-insensitive containment test.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline ILIKE '%Lennon%';
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
in 
In a given iterable; often a list, tuple, or queryset. It's not a common use
case, but strings (being iterables) are accepted.
Examples:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE id IN (1, 3, 4);
SELECT ... WHERE headline IN ('a', 'b', 'c');
You can also use a queryset to dynamically evaluate the list of values
instead of providing a list of literal values:
This queryset will be evaluated as subselect statement:
SELECT ... WHERE blog.id IN (SELECT id FROM ... WHERE NAME LIKE '%Cheddar%')
If you pass in a QuerySet resulting from values() or values_list()
as the value to an __in lookup, you need to ensure you are only extracting
one field in the result. For example, this will work (filtering on the blog
names):
This example will raise an exception, since the inner query is trying to
extract two field values, where only one is expected:
Performance considerations
Be cautious about using nested queries and understand your database
server's performance characteristics (if in doubt, benchmark!). Some
database backends, most notably MySQL, don't optimize nested queries very
well. It is more efficient, in those cases, to extract a list of values
and then pass that into the second query. That is, execute two queries
instead of one:
Note the list() call around the Blog QuerySet to force execution of
the first query. Without it, a nested query would be executed, because
QuerySets are lazy.
gt 
Greater than.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE id > 4;
gte 
Greater than or equal to.
lt 
Less than.
lte 
Less than or equal to.
startswith 
Case-sensitive starts-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline LIKE 'Lennon%';
SQLite doesn't support case-sensitive LIKE statements; startswith acts
like istartswith for SQLite.
istartswith 
Case-insensitive starts-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline ILIKE 'Lennon%';
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
endswith 
Case-sensitive ends-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline LIKE '%Lennon';
SQLite users
SQLite doesn't support case-sensitive LIKE statements; endswith
acts like iendswith for SQLite. Refer to the database note documentation for more.
iendswith 
Case-insensitive ends-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline ILIKE '%Lennon'
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
range 
Range test (inclusive).
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date BETWEEN '2005-01-01' and '2005-03-31';
You can use range anywhere you can use BETWEEN in SQL — for dates,
numbers and even characters.
Warning
Filtering a DateTimeField with dates won't include items on the last
day, because the bounds are interpreted as "0am on the given date". If
pub_date was a DateTimeField, the above expression would be turned
into this SQL:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date BETWEEN '2005-01-01 00:00:00' and '2005-03-31 00:00:00';
Generally speaking, you can't mix dates and datetimes.
date 
For datetime fields, casts the value as date. Allows chaining additional field
lookups. Takes a date value.
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, fields are converted to the current time
zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions in the
database.
year 
For date and datetime fields, an exact year match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer year.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date BETWEEN '2005-01-01' AND '2005-12-31';
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date >= '2005-01-01';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
iso_year 
For date and datetime fields, an exact ISO 8601 week-numbering year match.
Allows chaining additional field lookups. Takes an integer year.
Example:
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
month 
For date and datetime fields, an exact month match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer 1 (January) through 12 (December).
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('month' FROM pub_date) = '12';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('month' FROM pub_date) >= '6';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
day 
For date and datetime fields, an exact day match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer day.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('day' FROM pub_date) = '3';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('day' FROM pub_date) >= '3';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
Note this will match any record with a pub_date on the third day of the month,
such as January 3, July 3, etc.
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
week 
For date and datetime fields, return the week number (1-52 or 53) according
to ISO-8601, i.e., weeks start
on a Monday and the first week contains the year's first Thursday.
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
week_day 
For date and datetime fields, a 'day of the week' match. Allows chaining
additional field lookups.
Takes an integer value representing the day of week from 1 (Sunday) to 7
(Saturday).
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
Note this will match any record with a pub_date that falls on a Monday (day
2 of the week), regardless of the month or year in which it occurs. Week days
are indexed with day 1 being Sunday and day 7 being Saturday.
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
iso_week_day 
New in Django 3.1. 
For date and datetime fields, an exact ISO 8601 day of the week match. Allows
chaining additional field lookups.
Takes an integer value representing the day of the week from 1 (Monday) to 7
(Sunday).
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
Note this will match any record with a pub_date that falls on a Monday (day
1 of the week), regardless of the month or year in which it occurs. Week days
are indexed with day 1 being Monday and day 7 being Sunday.
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
quarter 
For date and datetime fields, a 'quarter of the year' match. Allows chaining
additional field lookups. Takes an integer value between 1 and 4 representing
the quarter of the year.
Example to retrieve entries in the second quarter (April 1 to June 30):
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
time 
For datetime fields, casts the value as time. Allows chaining additional field
lookups. Takes a datetime.time value.
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, fields are converted to the current time
zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions in the
database.
hour 
For datetime and time fields, an exact hour match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer between 0 and 23.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('hour' FROM timestamp) = '23';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('hour' FROM time) = '5';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('hour' FROM timestamp) >= '12';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
minute 
For datetime and time fields, an exact minute match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer between 0 and 59.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('minute' FROM timestamp) = '29';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('minute' FROM time) = '46';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('minute' FROM timestamp) >= '29';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
second 
For datetime and time fields, an exact second match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer between 0 and 59.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('second' FROM timestamp) = '31';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('second' FROM time) = '2';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('second' FROM timestamp) >= '31';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
isnull 
Takes either True or False, which correspond to SQL queries of
IS NULL and IS NOT NULL, respectively.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date IS NULL;
Deprecated since version 3.1: Using non-boolean values as the right-hand side is deprecated, use True
or False instead. In Django 4.0, the exception will be raised.
regex 
Case-sensitive regular expression match.
The regular expression syntax is that of the database backend in use.
In the case of SQLite, which has no built in regular expression support,
this feature is provided by a (Python) user-defined REGEXP function, and
the regular expression syntax is therefore that of Python's re module.
Example:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP BINARY '^(An?|The) +'; -- MySQL
SELECT ... WHERE REGEXP_LIKE(title, '^(An?|The) +', 'c'); -- Oracle
SELECT ... WHERE title ~ '^(An?|The) +'; -- PostgreSQL
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP '^(An?|The) +'; -- SQLite
Using raw strings (e.g., r'foo' instead of 'foo') for passing in the
regular expression syntax is recommended.
iregex 
Case-insensitive regular expression match.
Example:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP '^(an?|the) +'; -- MySQL
SELECT ... WHERE REGEXP_LIKE(title, '^(an?|the) +', 'i'); -- Oracle
SELECT ... WHERE title ~* '^(an?|the) +'; -- PostgreSQL
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP '(?i)^(an?|the) +'; -- SQLite
Aggregation functions 
Django provides the following aggregation functions in the
django.db.models module. For details on how to use these
aggregate functions, see the topic guide on aggregation. See the Aggregate
documentation to learn how to create your aggregates.
Warning
SQLite can't handle aggregation on date/time fields out of the box.
This is because there are no native date/time fields in SQLite and Django
currently emulates these features using a text field. Attempts to use
aggregation on date/time fields in SQLite will raise NotSupportedError.
Note
Aggregation functions return None when used with an empty
QuerySet. For example, the Sum aggregation function returns None
instead of 0 if the QuerySet contains no entries. An exception is
Count, which does return 0 if the QuerySet is empty.
All aggregates have the following parameters in common:
expressions 
Strings that reference fields on the model, transforms of the field, or
query expressions.
Changed in Django 3.2: Support for transforms of the field was added.
output_field 
An optional argument that represents the model field
of the return value
Note
When combining multiple field types, Django can only determine the
output_field if all fields are of the same type. Otherwise, you
must provide the output_field yourself.
filter 
An optional Q object that's used to filter the
rows that are aggregated.
See Conditional aggregation and Filtering on annotations for
example usage.
**extra 
Keyword arguments that can provide extra context for the SQL generated
by the aggregate.
Avg 
class Avg(expression, output_field=None, distinct=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the mean value of the given expression, which must be numeric
unless you specify a different output_field.
Default alias: <field>__avg
Return type: float if input is int, otherwise same as input
field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
distinct 
If distinct=True, Avg returns the mean value of unique values.
This is the SQL equivalent of AVG(DISTINCT <field>). The default
value is False.
Count 
class Count(expression, distinct=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the number of objects that are related through the provided
expression.
Default alias: <field>__count
Return type: int
Has one optional argument:
distinct 
If distinct=True, the count will only include unique instances.
This is the SQL equivalent of COUNT(DISTINCT <field>). The default
value is False.
Max 
class Max(expression, output_field=None, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the maximum value of the given expression.
Default alias: <field>__max
Return type: same as input field, or output_field if supplied
Min 
class Min(expression, output_field=None, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the minimum value of the given expression.
Default alias: <field>__min
Return type: same as input field, or output_field if supplied
StdDev 
class StdDev(expression, output_field=None, sample=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the standard deviation of the data in the provided expression.
Default alias: <field>__stddev
Return type: float if input is int, otherwise same as input
field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
sample 
By default, StdDev returns the population standard deviation. However,
if sample=True, the return value will be the sample standard deviation.
Sum 
class Sum(expression, output_field=None, distinct=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Computes the sum of all values of the given expression.
Default alias: <field>__sum
Return type: same as input field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
distinct 
If distinct=True, Sum returns the sum of unique values. This is
the SQL equivalent of SUM(DISTINCT <field>). The default value is
False.
Variance 
class Variance(expression, output_field=None, sample=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the variance of the data in the provided expression.
Default alias: <field>__variance
Return type: float if input is int, otherwise same as input
field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
sample 
By default, Variance returns the population variance. However,
if sample=True, the return value will be the sample variance.
Query-related tools 
This section provides reference material for query-related tools not documented
elsewhere.
Q() objects 
class Q[source] 
A Q() object represents an SQL condition that can be used in
database-related operations. It's similar to how an
F() object represents the value of a model field
or annotation. They make it possible to define and reuse conditions, and
combine them using operators such as | (OR) and & (AND). See
Complex lookups with Q objects.
Prefetch() objects 
class Prefetch(lookup, queryset=None, to_attr=None)[source] 
The Prefetch() object can be used to control the operation of
prefetch_related().
The lookup argument describes the relations to follow and works the same
as the string based lookups passed to
prefetch_related(). 
<QuerySet [<Choice: Not much>, <Choice: The sky>, <Choice: Just hacking again>]>
# This will only execute two queries regardless of the number of Question
# and Choice objects.
<QuerySet [<Question: What's up?>]>
The queryset argument supplies a base QuerySet for the given lookup.
This is useful to further filter down the prefetch operation, or to call
select_related() from the prefetched
relation, hence reducing the number of queries even further:
<QuerySet [<Choice: The sky>]>
<QuerySet [<Choice: The sky>]>
The to_attr argument sets the result of the prefetch operation to a custom
attribute:
[<Choice: The sky>]
<QuerySet [<Choice: Not much>, <Choice: The sky>, <Choice: Just hacking again>]>
Note
When using to_attr the prefetched result is stored in a list. This can
provide a significant speed improvement over traditional
prefetch_related calls which store the cached result within a
QuerySet instance.
prefetch_related_objects() 
prefetch_related_objects(model_instances, *related_lookups)[source] 
Prefetches the given lookups on an iterable of model instances. This is useful
in code that receives a list of model instances as opposed to a QuerySet;
for example, when fetching models from a cache or instantiating them manually.
Pass an iterable of model instances (must all be of the same class) and the
lookups or Prefetch objects you want to prefetch for. 
When using multiple databases with prefetch_related_objects, the prefetch
query will use the database associated with the model instance. This can be
overridden by using a custom queryset in a related lookup.
FilteredRelation() objects 
class FilteredRelation(relation_name, *, condition=Q())[source] 
relation_name 
The name of the field on which you'd like to filter the relation.
condition 
A Q object to control the filtering.
FilteredRelation is used with annotate() to create an
ON clause when a JOIN is performed. It doesn't act on the default
relationship but on the annotation name (pizzas_vegetarian in example
below).
For example, to find restaurants that have vegetarian pizzas with
'mozzarella' in the name:
If there are a large number of pizzas, this queryset performs better than:
because the filtering in the WHERE clause of the first queryset will only
operate on vegetarian pizzas.
FilteredRelation doesn't support:
QuerySet.only() and prefetch_related().
A GenericForeignKey
inherited from a parent model.
Changed in Django 3.2: Support for nested relations was added.
QuerySet API reference 
This document describes the details of the QuerySet API. It builds on the
material presented in the model and database
query guides, so you'll probably want to read and
understand those documents before reading this one.
Throughout this reference we'll use the example Weblog models presented in the database query guide.
When QuerySets are evaluated 
Internally, a QuerySet can be constructed, filtered, sliced, and generally
passed around without actually hitting the database. No database activity
actually occurs until you do something to evaluate the queryset.
You can evaluate a QuerySet in the following ways:
Iteration. A QuerySet is iterable, and it executes its database
query the first time you iterate over it. For example, this will print
the headline of all entries in the database:
Note: Don't use this if all you want to do is determine if at least one
result exists. It's more efficient to use exists().
Slicing. As explained in Limiting QuerySets, a QuerySet can
be sliced, using Python's array-slicing syntax. Slicing an unevaluated
QuerySet usually returns another unevaluated QuerySet, but Django
will execute the database query if you use the "step" parameter of slice
syntax, and will return a list. Slicing a QuerySet that has been
evaluated also returns a list.
Also note that even though slicing an unevaluated QuerySet returns
another unevaluated QuerySet, modifying it further (e.g., adding
more filters, or modifying ordering) is not allowed, since that does not
translate well into SQL and it would not have a clear meaning either.
Pickling/Caching. See the following section for details of what
is involved when pickling QuerySets. The important thing for the
purposes of this section is that the results are read from the database.
repr(). A QuerySet is evaluated when you call repr() on it.
This is for convenience in the Python interactive interpreter, so you can
immediately see your results when using the API interactively.
len(). A QuerySet is evaluated when you call len() on it.
This, as you might expect, returns the length of the result list.
Note: If you only need to determine the number of records in the set (and
don't need the actual objects), it's much more efficient to handle a count
at the database level using SQL's SELECT COUNT(*). Django provides a
count() method for precisely this reason.
list(). Force evaluation of a QuerySet by calling list() on
it. 
bool(). Testing a QuerySet in a boolean context, such as using
bool(), or, and or an if statement, will cause the query
to be executed. If there is at least one result, the QuerySet is
True, otherwise False. 
Note: If you only want to determine if at least one result exists (and don't
need the actual objects), it's more efficient to use exists().
Pickling QuerySets 
If you pickle a QuerySet, this will force all the results to be loaded
into memory prior to pickling. Pickling is usually used as a precursor to
caching and when the cached queryset is reloaded, you want the results to
already be present and ready for use (reading from the database can take some
time, defeating the purpose of caching). This means that when you unpickle a
QuerySet, it contains the results at the moment it was pickled, rather
than the results that are currently in the database.
If you only want to pickle the necessary information to recreate the
QuerySet from the database at a later time, pickle the query attribute
of the QuerySet. You can then recreate the original QuerySet (without
any results loaded) using some code like this:
The query attribute is an opaque object. It represents the internals of
the query construction and is not part of the public API. However, it is safe
(and fully supported) to pickle and unpickle the attribute's contents as
described here.
Restrictions on QuerySet.values_list()
If you recreate QuerySet.values_list() using the pickled query
attribute, it will be converted to QuerySet.values():
You can't share pickles between versions
Pickles of QuerySets are only valid for the version of Django that
was used to generate them. If you generate a pickle using Django
version N, there is no guarantee that pickle will be readable with
Django version N+1. Pickles should not be used as part of a long-term
archival strategy.
Since pickle compatibility errors can be difficult to diagnose, such as
silently corrupted objects, a RuntimeWarning is raised when you try to
unpickle a queryset in a Django version that is different than the one in
which it was pickled.
QuerySet API 
Here's the formal declaration of a QuerySet:
class QuerySet(model=None, query=None, using=None, hints=None)[source] 
Usually when you'll interact with a QuerySet you'll use it by
chaining filters. To make this work, most
QuerySet methods return new querysets. These methods are covered in
detail later in this section.
The QuerySet class has two public attributes you can use for
introspection:
ordered 
True if the QuerySet is ordered — i.e. has an
order_by() clause or a default ordering on the model.
False otherwise.
db 
The database that will be used if this query is executed now.
Note
The query parameter to QuerySet exists so that specialized
query subclasses can reconstruct internal query state. The value of the
parameter is an opaque representation of that query state and is not
part of a public API.
Methods that return new QuerySets 
Django provides a range of QuerySet refinement methods that modify either
the types of results returned by the QuerySet or the way its SQL query is
executed.
filter() 
filter(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns a new QuerySet containing objects that match the given lookup
parameters.
The lookup parameters (**kwargs) should be in the format described in
Field lookups below. Multiple parameters are joined via AND in the
underlying SQL statement.
If you need to execute more complex queries (for example, queries with OR statements),
you can use Q objects (*args).
exclude() 
exclude(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns a new QuerySet containing objects that do not match the given
lookup parameters.
The lookup parameters (**kwargs) should be in the format described in
Field lookups below. Multiple parameters are joined via AND in the
underlying SQL statement, and the whole thing is enclosed in a NOT().
This example excludes all entries whose pub_date is later than 2005-1-3
AND whose headline is "Hello":
In SQL terms, that evaluates to:
SELECT ...
WHERE NOT (pub_date > '2005-1-3' AND headline = 'Hello')
This example excludes all entries whose pub_date is later than 2005-1-3
OR whose headline is "Hello":
In SQL terms, that evaluates to:
SELECT ...
WHERE NOT pub_date > '2005-1-3'
AND NOT headline = 'Hello'
Note the second example is more restrictive.
If you need to execute more complex queries (for example, queries with OR statements),
you can use Q objects (*args).
annotate() 
annotate(*args, **kwargs) 
Annotates each object in the QuerySet with the provided list of query
expressions. An expression may be a simple value, a
reference to a field on the model (or any related models), or an aggregate
expression (averages, sums, etc.) that has been computed over the objects that
are related to the objects in the QuerySet.
Each argument to annotate() is an annotation that will be added
to each object in the QuerySet that is returned.
The aggregation functions that are provided by Django are described
in Aggregation Functions below.
Annotations specified using keyword arguments will use the keyword as
the alias for the annotation. Anonymous arguments will have an alias
generated for them based upon the name of the aggregate function and
the model field that is being aggregated. Only aggregate expressions
that reference a single field can be anonymous arguments. Everything
else must be a keyword argument.
For example, if you were manipulating a list of blogs, you may want
to determine how many entries have been made in each blog:
The Blog model doesn't define an entry__count attribute by itself,
but by using a keyword argument to specify the aggregate function, you can
control the name of the annotation:
For an in-depth discussion of aggregation, see the topic guide on
Aggregation.
alias() 
alias(*args, **kwargs) 
New in Django 3.2. 
Same as annotate(), but instead of annotating objects in the
QuerySet, saves the expression for later reuse with other QuerySet
methods. This is useful when the result of the expression itself is not needed
but it is used for filtering, ordering, or as a part of a complex expression.
Not selecting the unused value removes redundant work from the database which
should result in better performance.
For example, if you want to find blogs with more than 5 entries, but are not
interested in the exact number of entries, you could do this:
alias() can be used in conjunction with annotate(), exclude(),
filter(), order_by(), and update(). To use aliased expression
with other methods (e.g. aggregate()), you must promote it to an
annotation:
filter() and order_by() can take expressions directly, but
expression construction and usage often does not happen in the same place (for
example, QuerySet method creates expressions, for later use in views).
alias() allows building complex expressions incrementally, possibly
spanning multiple methods and modules, refer to the expression parts by their
aliases and only use annotate() for the final result.
order_by() 
order_by(*fields) 
By default, results returned by a QuerySet are ordered by the ordering
tuple given by the ordering option in the model's Meta. You can
override this on a per-QuerySet basis by using the order_by method.
Example:
The result above will be ordered by pub_date descending, then by
headline ascending. The negative sign in front of "-pub_date" indicates
descending order. Ascending order is implied. To order randomly, use "?",
like so:
Note: order_by('?') queries may be expensive and slow, depending on the
database backend you're using.
To order by a field in a different model, use the same syntax as when you are
querying across model relations. That is, the name of the field, followed by a
double underscore (__), followed by the name of the field in the new model,
and so on for as many models as you want to join. 
If you try to order by a field that is a relation to another model, Django will
use the default ordering on the related model, or order by the related model's
primary key if there is no Meta.ordering specified. For example, since the Blog
model has no default ordering specified:
…is identical to:
If Blog had ordering = ['name'], then the first queryset would be
identical to:
You can also order by query expressions by
calling asc() or desc() on the
expression:
asc() and desc() have arguments
(nulls_first and nulls_last) that control how null values are sorted.
Be cautious when ordering by fields in related models if you are also using
distinct(). See the note in distinct() for an explanation of how
related model ordering can change the expected results.
Note
It is permissible to specify a multi-valued field to order the results by
(for example, a ManyToManyField field, or the
reverse relation of a ForeignKey field).
Consider this case:
Here, there could potentially be multiple ordering data for each Event;
each Event with multiple children will be returned multiple times
into the new QuerySet that order_by() creates. In other words,
using order_by() on the QuerySet could return more items than you
were working on to begin with - which is probably neither expected nor
useful.
Thus, take care when using multi-valued field to order the results. If
you can be sure that there will only be one ordering piece of data for each
of the items you're ordering, this approach should not present problems. If
not, make sure the results are what you expect.
There's no way to specify whether ordering should be case sensitive. With
respect to case-sensitivity, Django will order results however your database
backend normally orders them.
You can order by a field converted to lowercase with
Lower which will achieve case-consistent
ordering:
If you don't want any ordering to be applied to a query, not even the default
ordering, call order_by() with no parameters.
You can tell if a query is ordered or not by checking the
QuerySet.ordered attribute, which will be True if the
QuerySet has been ordered in any way.
Each order_by() call will clear any previous ordering. For example, this
query will be ordered by pub_date and not headline:
Warning
Ordering is not a free operation. Each field you add to the ordering
incurs a cost to your database. Each foreign key you add will
implicitly include all of its default orderings as well.
If a query doesn't have an ordering specified, results are returned from
the database in an unspecified order. A particular ordering is guaranteed
only when ordering by a set of fields that uniquely identify each object in
the results. For example, if a name field isn't unique, ordering by it
won't guarantee objects with the same name always appear in the same order.
reverse() 
reverse() 
Use the reverse() method to reverse the order in which a queryset's
elements are returned. Calling reverse() a second time restores the
ordering back to the normal direction.
To retrieve the "last" five items in a queryset, you could do this:
Note that this is not quite the same as slicing from the end of a sequence in
Python. The above example will return the last item first, then the
penultimate item and so on. If we had a Python sequence and looked at
seq[-5:], we would see the fifth-last item first. Django doesn't support
that mode of access (slicing from the end), because it's not possible to do it
efficiently in SQL.
Also, note that reverse() should generally only be called on a QuerySet
which has a defined ordering (e.g., when querying against a model which defines
a default ordering, or when using order_by()). If no such ordering is
defined for a given QuerySet, calling reverse() on it has no real
effect (the ordering was undefined prior to calling reverse(), and will
remain undefined afterward).
distinct() 
distinct(*fields) 
Returns a new QuerySet that uses SELECT DISTINCT in its SQL query. This
eliminates duplicate rows from the query results.
By default, a QuerySet will not eliminate duplicate rows. In practice, this
is rarely a problem, because simple queries such as Blog.objects.all()
don't introduce the possibility of duplicate result rows. However, if your
query spans multiple tables, it's possible to get duplicate results when a
QuerySet is evaluated. That's when you'd use distinct().
Note
Any fields used in an order_by() call are included in the SQL
SELECT columns. This can sometimes lead to unexpected results when used
in conjunction with distinct(). If you order by fields from a related
model, those fields will be added to the selected columns and they may make
otherwise duplicate rows appear to be distinct. Since the extra columns
don't appear in the returned results (they are only there to support
ordering), it sometimes looks like non-distinct results are being returned.
Similarly, if you use a values() query to restrict the columns
selected, the columns used in any order_by() (or default model
ordering) will still be involved and may affect uniqueness of the results.
The moral here is that if you are using distinct() be careful about
ordering by related models. Similarly, when using distinct() and
values() together, be careful when ordering by fields not in the
values() call.
On PostgreSQL only, you can pass positional arguments (*fields) in order to
specify the names of fields to which the DISTINCT should apply. This
translates to a SELECT DISTINCT ON SQL query. Here's the difference. For a
normal distinct() call, the database compares each field in each row when
determining which rows are distinct. For a distinct() call with specified
field names, the database will only compare the specified field names.
Note
When you specify field names, you must provide an order_by() in the
QuerySet, and the fields in order_by() must start with the fields in
distinct(), in the same order.
For example, SELECT DISTINCT ON (a) gives you the first row for each
value in column a. If you don't specify an order, you'll get some
arbitrary row.
Examples (those after the first will only work on PostgreSQL):
Note
Keep in mind that order_by() uses any default related model ordering
that has been defined. You might have to explicitly order by the relation
_id or referenced field to make sure the DISTINCT ON expressions
match those at the beginning of the ORDER BY clause. For example, if
the Blog model defined an ordering by
name:
…wouldn't work because the query would be ordered by blog__name thus
mismatching the DISTINCT ON expression. You'd have to explicitly order
by the relation _id field (blog_id in this case) or the referenced
one (blog__pk) to make sure both expressions match.
values() 
values(*fields, **expressions) 
Returns a QuerySet that returns dictionaries, rather than model instances,
when used as an iterable.
Each of those dictionaries represents an object, with the keys corresponding to
the attribute names of model objects.
This example compares the dictionaries of values() with the normal model
objects:
The values() method takes optional positional arguments, *fields, which
specify field names to which the SELECT should be limited. If you specify
the fields, each dictionary will contain only the field keys/values for the
fields you specify. If you don't specify the fields, each dictionary will
contain a key and value for every field in the database table.
Example:
The values() method also takes optional keyword arguments,
**expressions, which are passed through to annotate():
You can use built-in and custom lookups in
ordering. 
An aggregate within a values() clause is applied before other arguments
within the same values() clause. If you need to group by another value,
add it to an earlier values() clause instead. 
A few subtleties that are worth mentioning:
If you have a field called foo that is a
ForeignKey, the default values() call
will return a dictionary key called foo_id, since this is the name
of the hidden model attribute that stores the actual value (the foo
attribute refers to the related model). When you are calling
values() and passing in field names, you can pass in either foo
or foo_id and you will get back the same thing (the dictionary key
will match the field name you passed in).
When using values() together with distinct(), be aware that
ordering can affect the results. See the note in distinct() for
details.
If you use a values() clause after an extra() call,
any fields defined by a select argument in the extra() must
be explicitly included in the values() call. Any extra() call
made after a values() call will have its extra selected fields
ignored.
Calling only() and defer() after values() doesn't make
sense, so doing so will raise a TypeError.
Combining transforms and aggregates requires the use of two annotate()
calls, either explicitly or as keyword arguments to values(). As above,
if the transform has been registered on the relevant field type the first
annotate() can be omitted, thus the following examples are equivalent:
It is useful when you know you're only going to need values from a small number
of the available fields and you won't need the functionality of a model
instance object. It's more efficient to select only the fields you need to use.
Finally, note that you can call filter(), order_by(), etc. after the
values() call, that means that these two calls are identical:
The people who made Django prefer to put all the SQL-affecting methods first,
followed (optionally) by any output-affecting methods (such as values()),
but it doesn't really matter. This is your chance to really flaunt your
individualism.
You can also refer to fields on related models with reverse relations through
OneToOneField, ForeignKey and ManyToManyField attributes:
Warning
Because ManyToManyField attributes and reverse
relations can have multiple related rows, including these can have a
multiplier effect on the size of your result set. This will be especially
pronounced if you include multiple such fields in your values() query,
in which case all possible combinations will be returned.
Boolean values for JSONField on SQLite
Due to the way the JSON_EXTRACT SQL function is implemented on SQLite,
values() will return 1 and 0 instead of True and False
for JSONField key transforms.
values_list() 
values_list(*fields, flat=False, named=False) 
This is similar to values() except that instead of returning dictionaries,
it returns tuples when iterated over. Each tuple contains the value from the
respective field or expression passed into the values_list() call — so the
first item is the first field, etc. 
If you only pass in a single field, you can also pass in the flat
parameter. If True, this will mean the returned results are single values,
rather than one-tuples. An example should make the difference clearer:
It is an error to pass in flat when there is more than one field.
You can pass named=True to get results as a
namedtuple():
Using a named tuple may make use of the results more readable, at the expense
of a small performance penalty for transforming the results into a named tuple.
If you don't pass any values to values_list(), it will return all the
fields in the model, in the order they were declared.
A common need is to get a specific field value of a certain model instance. To
achieve that, use values_list() followed by a get() call:
values() and values_list() are both intended as optimizations for a
specific use case: retrieving a subset of data without the overhead of creating
a model instance. This metaphor falls apart when dealing with many-to-many and
other multivalued relations (such as the one-to-many relation of a reverse
foreign key) because the "one row, one object" assumption doesn't hold.
For example, notice the behavior when querying across a
ManyToManyField:
Authors with multiple entries appear multiple times and authors without any
entries have None for the entry headline.
Similarly, when querying a reverse foreign key, None appears for entries
not having any author:
Boolean values for JSONField on SQLite
Due to the way the JSON_EXTRACT SQL function is implemented on SQLite,
values_list() will return 1 and 0 instead of True and
False for JSONField key transforms.
dates() 
dates(field, kind, order='ASC') 
Returns a QuerySet that evaluates to a list of datetime.date
objects representing all available dates of a particular kind within the
contents of the QuerySet.
field should be the name of a DateField of your model.
kind should be either "year", "month", "week", or "day".
Each datetime.date object in the result list is "truncated" to the
given type.
"year" returns a list of all distinct year values for the field.
"month" returns a list of all distinct year/month values for the
field.
"week" returns a list of all distinct year/week values for the field. All
dates will be a Monday.
"day" returns a list of all distinct year/month/day values for the
field.
order, which defaults to 'ASC', should be either 'ASC' or
'DESC'. This specifies how to order the results.
Examples:
datetimes() 
datetimes(field_name, kind, order='ASC', tzinfo=None, is_dst=None) 
Returns a QuerySet that evaluates to a list of datetime.datetime
objects representing all available dates of a particular kind within the
contents of the QuerySet.
field_name should be the name of a DateTimeField of your model.
kind should be either "year", "month", "week", "day",
"hour", "minute", or "second". Each datetime.datetime
object in the result list is "truncated" to the given type.
order, which defaults to 'ASC', should be either 'ASC' or
'DESC'. This specifies how to order the results.
tzinfo defines the time zone to which datetimes are converted prior to
truncation. Indeed, a given datetime has different representations depending
on the time zone in use. This parameter must be a datetime.tzinfo
object. If it's None, Django uses the current time zone. It has no effect when USE_TZ is
False.
is_dst indicates whether or not pytz should interpret nonexistent and
ambiguous datetimes in daylight saving time. By default (when is_dst=None),
pytz raises an exception for such datetimes.
New in Django 3.1: The is_dst parameter was added.
Note
This function performs time zone conversions directly in the database.
As a consequence, your database must be able to interpret the value of
tzinfo.tzname(None). This translates into the following requirements:
SQLite: no requirements. Conversions are performed in Python with pytz
(installed when you install Django).
PostgreSQL: no requirements (see Time Zones).
Oracle: no requirements (see Choosing a Time Zone File).
MySQL: load the time zone tables with mysql_tzinfo_to_sql.
none() 
none() 
Calling none() will create a queryset that never returns any objects and no
query will be executed when accessing the results. A qs.none() queryset
is an instance of EmptyQuerySet.
Examples:
all() 
all() 
Returns a copy of the current QuerySet (or QuerySet subclass).  This
can be useful in situations where you might want to pass in either a model
manager or a QuerySet and do further filtering on the result. After calling
all() on either object, you'll definitely have a QuerySet to work with.
When a QuerySet is evaluated, it
typically caches its results. If the data in the database might have changed
since a QuerySet was evaluated, you can get updated results for the same
query by calling all() on a previously evaluated QuerySet.
union() 
union(*other_qs, all=False) 
Uses SQL's UNION operator to combine the results of two or more
QuerySets. 
The UNION operator selects only distinct values by default. To allow
duplicate values, use the all=True argument.
union(), intersection(), and difference() return model instances
of the type of the first QuerySet even if the arguments are QuerySets
of other models. Passing different models works as long as the SELECT list
is the same in all QuerySets (at least the types, the names don't matter
as long as the types are in the same order). In such cases, you must use the
column names from the first QuerySet in QuerySet methods applied to the
resulting QuerySet. 
In addition, only LIMIT, OFFSET, COUNT(*), ORDER BY, and
specifying columns (i.e. slicing, count(), exists(),
order_by(), and values()/values_list()) are allowed
on the resulting QuerySet. Further, databases place restrictions on
what operations are allowed in the combined queries. For example, most
databases don't allow LIMIT or OFFSET in the combined queries.
intersection() 
intersection(*other_qs) 
Uses SQL's INTERSECT operator to return the shared elements of two or more
QuerySets. 
See union() for some restrictions.
difference() 
difference(*other_qs) 
Uses SQL's EXCEPT operator to keep only elements present in the
QuerySet but not in some other QuerySets. 
See union() for some restrictions.
select_related() 
select_related(*fields) 
Returns a QuerySet that will "follow" foreign-key relationships, selecting
additional related-object data when it executes its query. This is a
performance booster which results in a single more complex query but means
later use of foreign-key relationships won't require database queries.
The following examples illustrate the difference between plain lookups and
select_related() lookups. Here's standard lookup:
And here's select_related lookup:
You can use select_related() with any queryset of objects:
The order of filter() and select_related() chaining isn't important.
These querysets are equivalent:
You can follow foreign keys in a similar way to querying them. If you have the
following models:
… then a call to Book.objects.select_related('author__hometown').get(id=4)
will cache the related Person and the related City:
You can refer to any ForeignKey or
OneToOneField relation in the list of fields
passed to select_related().
You can also refer to the reverse direction of a
OneToOneField in the list of fields passed to
select_related — that is, you can traverse a
OneToOneField back to the object on which the field
is defined. Instead of specifying the field name, use the related_name for the field on the related object.
There may be some situations where you wish to call select_related() with a
lot of related objects, or where you don't know all of the relations. In these
cases it is possible to call select_related() with no arguments. This will
follow all non-null foreign keys it can find - nullable foreign keys must be
specified. This is not recommended in most cases as it is likely to make the
underlying query more complex, and return more data, than is actually needed.
If you need to clear the list of related fields added by past calls of
select_related on a QuerySet, you can pass None as a parameter:
Chaining select_related calls works in a similar way to other methods -
that is that select_related('foo', 'bar') is equivalent to
select_related('foo').select_related('bar').
prefetch_related() 
prefetch_related(*lookups) 
Returns a QuerySet that will automatically retrieve, in a single batch,
related objects for each of the specified lookups.
This has a similar purpose to select_related, in that both are designed to
stop the deluge of database queries that is caused by accessing related objects,
but the strategy is quite different.
select_related works by creating an SQL join and including the fields of the
related object in the SELECT statement. For this reason, select_related
gets the related objects in the same database query. However, to avoid the much
larger result set that would result from joining across a 'many' relationship,
select_related is limited to single-valued relationships - foreign key and
one-to-one.
prefetch_related, on the other hand, does a separate lookup for each
relationship, and does the 'joining' in Python. This allows it to prefetch
many-to-many and many-to-one objects, which cannot be done using
select_related, in addition to the foreign key and one-to-one relationships
that are supported by select_related. It also supports prefetching of
GenericRelation and
GenericForeignKey, however, it
must be restricted to a homogeneous set of results. For example, prefetching
objects referenced by a GenericForeignKey is only supported if the query
is restricted to one ContentType.
For example, suppose you have these models:
and run:
The problem with this is that every time Pizza.__str__() asks for
self.toppings.all() it has to query the database, so
Pizza.objects.all() will run a query on the Toppings table for every
item in the Pizza QuerySet.
We can reduce to just two queries using prefetch_related:
This implies a self.toppings.all() for each Pizza; now each time
self.toppings.all() is called, instead of having to go to the database for
the items, it will find them in a prefetched QuerySet cache that was
populated in a single query.
That is, all the relevant toppings will have been fetched in a single query,
and used to make QuerySets that have a pre-filled cache of the relevant
results; these QuerySets are then used in the self.toppings.all() calls.
The additional queries in prefetch_related() are executed after the
QuerySet has begun to be evaluated and the primary query has been executed.
If you have an iterable of model instances, you can prefetch related attributes
on those instances using the prefetch_related_objects()
function.
Note that the result cache of the primary QuerySet and all specified related
objects will then be fully loaded into memory. This changes the typical
behavior of QuerySets, which normally try to avoid loading all objects into
memory before they are needed, even after a query has been executed in the
database.
Note
Remember that, as always with QuerySets, any subsequent chained methods
which imply a different database query will ignore previously cached
results, and retrieve data using a fresh database query. So, if you write
the following:
…then the fact that pizza.toppings.all() has been prefetched will not
help you. The prefetch_related('toppings') implied
pizza.toppings.all(), but pizza.toppings.filter() is a new and
different query. The prefetched cache can't help here; in fact it hurts
performance, since you have done a database query that you haven't used. So
use this feature with caution!
Also, if you call the database-altering methods
add(),
remove(),
clear() or
set(), on
related managers,
any prefetched cache for the relation will be cleared.
You can also use the normal join syntax to do related fields of related
fields. Suppose we have an additional model to the example above:
The following are all legal:
This will prefetch all pizzas belonging to restaurants, and all toppings
belonging to those pizzas. This will result in a total of 3 database queries -
one for the restaurants, one for the pizzas, and one for the toppings.
This will fetch the best pizza and all the toppings for the best pizza for each
restaurant. This will be done in 3 database queries - one for the restaurants,
one for the 'best pizzas', and one for the toppings.
The best_pizza relationship could also be fetched using select_related
to reduce the query count to 2:
Since the prefetch is executed after the main query (which includes the joins
needed by select_related), it is able to detect that the best_pizza
objects have already been fetched, and it will skip fetching them again.
Chaining prefetch_related calls will accumulate the lookups that are
prefetched. To clear any prefetch_related behavior, pass None as a
parameter:
One difference to note when using prefetch_related is that objects created
by a query can be shared between the different objects that they are related to
i.e. a single Python model instance can appear at more than one point in the
tree of objects that are returned. This will normally happen with foreign key
relationships. Typically this behavior will not be a problem, and will in fact
save both memory and CPU time.
While prefetch_related supports prefetching GenericForeignKey
relationships, the number of queries will depend on the data. Since a
GenericForeignKey can reference data in multiple tables, one query per table
referenced is needed, rather than one query for all the items. There could be
additional queries on the ContentType table if the relevant rows have not
already been fetched.
prefetch_related in most cases will be implemented using an SQL query that
uses the 'IN' operator. This means that for a large QuerySet a large 'IN' clause
could be generated, which, depending on the database, might have performance
problems of its own when it comes to parsing or executing the SQL query. Always
profile for your use case!
Note that if you use iterator() to run the query, prefetch_related()
calls will be ignored since these two optimizations do not make sense together.
You can use the Prefetch object to further control
the prefetch operation.
In its simplest form Prefetch is equivalent to the traditional string based
lookups:
You can provide a custom queryset with the optional queryset argument.
This can be used to change the default ordering of the queryset:
...     Prefetch('pizzas__toppings', queryset=Toppings.objects.order_by('name')))
Or to call select_related() when
applicable to reduce the number of queries even further:
...     Prefetch('restaurants', queryset=Restaurant.objects.select_related('best_pizza')))
You can also assign the prefetched result to a custom attribute with the optional
to_attr argument. The result will be stored directly in a list.
This allows prefetching the same relation multiple times with a different
QuerySet; for instance:
...     Prefetch('pizzas', to_attr='menu'),
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=vegetarian_pizzas, to_attr='vegetarian_menu'))
Lookups created with custom to_attr can still be traversed as usual by other
lookups:
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=vegetarian_pizzas, to_attr='vegetarian_menu'),
...     'vegetarian_menu__toppings')
Using to_attr is recommended when filtering down the prefetch result as it is
less ambiguous than storing a filtered result in the related manager's cache:
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=queryset, to_attr='vegetarian_pizzas'))
...     Prefetch('pizzas', queryset=queryset))
Custom prefetching also works with single related relations like
forward ForeignKey or OneToOneField. Generally you'll want to use
select_related() for these relations, but there are a number of cases
where prefetching with a custom QuerySet is useful:
You want to use a QuerySet that performs further prefetching
on related models.
You want to prefetch only a subset of the related objects.
You want to use performance optimization techniques like
deferred fields:
...     Prefetch('best_pizza', queryset=queryset))
When using multiple databases, Prefetch will respect your choice of
database. If the inner query does not specify a database, it will use the
database selected by the outer query. All of the following are valid:
Note
The ordering of lookups matters.
Take the following examples:
This works even though it's unordered because 'pizzas__toppings'
already contains all the needed information, therefore the second argument
'pizzas' is actually redundant.
This will raise a ValueError because of the attempt to redefine the
queryset of a previously seen lookup. Note that an implicit queryset was
created to traverse 'pizzas' as part of the 'pizzas__toppings'
lookup.
This will trigger an AttributeError because 'pizza_list' doesn't exist yet
when 'pizza_list__toppings' is being processed.
This consideration is not limited to the use of Prefetch objects. Some
advanced techniques may require that the lookups be performed in a
specific order to avoid creating extra queries; therefore it's recommended
to always carefully order prefetch_related arguments.
extra() 
extra(select=None, where=None, params=None, tables=None, order_by=None, select_params=None) 
Sometimes, the Django query syntax by itself can't easily express a complex
WHERE clause. For these edge cases, Django provides the extra()
QuerySet modifier — a hook for injecting specific clauses into the SQL
generated by a QuerySet.
Use this method as a last resort
This is an old API that we aim to deprecate at some point in the future.
Use it only if you cannot express your query using other queryset methods.
If you do need to use it, please file a ticket using the QuerySet.extra
keyword
with your use case (please check the list of existing tickets first) so
that we can enhance the QuerySet API to allow removing extra(). We are
no longer improving or fixing bugs for this method.
For example, this use of extra():
is equivalent to:
The main benefit of using RawSQL is
that you can set output_field if needed. The main downside is that if
you refer to some table alias of the queryset in the raw SQL, then it is
possible that Django might change that alias (for example, when the
queryset is used as a subquery in yet another query).
Warning
You should be very careful whenever you use extra(). Every time you use
it, you should escape any parameters that the user can control by using
params in order to protect against SQL injection attacks.
You also must not quote placeholders in the SQL string. This example is
vulnerable to SQL injection because of the quotes around %s:
SELECT col FROM sometable WHERE othercol = '%s'  # unsafe!
You can read more about how Django's SQL injection protection works.
By definition, these extra lookups may not be portable to different database
engines (because you're explicitly writing SQL code) and violate the DRY
principle, so you should avoid them if possible.
Specify one or more of params, select, where or tables. None
of the arguments is required, but you should use at least one of them.
select
The select argument lets you put extra fields in the SELECT
clause.  It should be a dictionary mapping attribute names to SQL
clauses to use to calculate that attribute.
Example:
As a result, each Entry object will have an extra attribute,
is_recent, a boolean representing whether the entry's pub_date
is greater than Jan. 1, 2006.
Django inserts the given SQL snippet directly into the SELECT
statement, so the resulting SQL of the above example would be something like:
SELECT blog_entry.*, (pub_date > '2006-01-01') AS is_recent
FROM blog_entry;
The next example is more advanced; it does a subquery to give each
resulting Blog object an entry_count attribute, an integer count
of associated Entry objects:
In this particular case, we're exploiting the fact that the query will
already contain the blog_blog table in its FROM clause.
The resulting SQL of the above example would be:
SELECT blog_blog.*, (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM blog_entry WHERE blog_entry.blog_id = blog_blog.id) AS entry_count
FROM blog_blog;
Note that the parentheses required by most database engines around
subqueries are not required in Django's select clauses. Also note
that some database backends, such as some MySQL versions, don't support
subqueries.
In some rare cases, you might wish to pass parameters to the SQL
fragments in extra(select=...). For this purpose, use the
select_params parameter.
This will work, for example:
If you need to use a literal %s inside your select string, use
the sequence %%s.
where / tables
You can define explicit SQL WHERE clauses — perhaps to perform
non-explicit joins — by using where. You can manually add tables to
the SQL FROM clause by using tables.
where and tables both take a list of strings. All where
parameters are "AND"ed to any other search criteria.
Example:
…translates (roughly) into the following SQL:
SELECT * FROM blog_entry WHERE (foo='a' OR bar='a') AND (baz='a')
Be careful when using the tables parameter if you're specifying
tables that are already used in the query. When you add extra tables
via the tables parameter, Django assumes you want that table
included an extra time, if it is already included. That creates a
problem, since the table name will then be given an alias. If a table
appears multiple times in an SQL statement, the second and subsequent
occurrences must use aliases so the database can tell them apart. If
you're referring to the extra table you added in the extra where
parameter this is going to cause errors.
Normally you'll only be adding extra tables that don't already appear
in the query. However, if the case outlined above does occur, there are
a few solutions. First, see if you can get by without including the
extra table and use the one already in the query. If that isn't
possible, put your extra() call at the front of the queryset
construction so that your table is the first use of that table.
Finally, if all else fails, look at the query produced and rewrite your
where addition to use the alias given to your extra table. The
alias will be the same each time you construct the queryset in the same
way, so you can rely upon the alias name to not change.
order_by
If you need to order the resulting queryset using some of the new
fields or tables you have included via extra() use the order_by
parameter to extra() and pass in a sequence of strings. These
strings should either be model fields (as in the normal
order_by() method on querysets), of the form
table_name.column_name or an alias for a column that you specified
in the select parameter to extra().
This would sort all the items for which is_recent is true to the
front of the result set (True sorts before False in a
descending ordering).
This shows, by the way, that you can make multiple calls to extra()
and it will behave as you expect (adding new constraints each time).
params
The where parameter described above may use standard Python
database string placeholders — '%s' to indicate parameters the
database engine should automatically quote. The params argument is
a list of any extra parameters to be substituted.
Example:
Always use params instead of embedding values directly into
where because params will ensure values are quoted correctly
according to your particular backend. For example, quotes will be
escaped correctly.
Bad:
Good:
Warning
If you are performing queries on MySQL, note that MySQL's silent type coercion
may cause unexpected results when mixing types. If you query on a string
type column, but with an integer value, MySQL will coerce the types of all values
in the table to an integer before performing the comparison. For example, if your
table contains the values 'abc', 'def' and you query for WHERE mycolumn=0,
both rows will match. To prevent this, perform the correct typecasting
before using the value in a query.
defer() 
defer(*fields) 
In some complex data-modeling situations, your models might contain a lot of
fields, some of which could contain a lot of data (for example, text fields),
or require expensive processing to convert them to Python objects. If you are
using the results of a queryset in some situation where you don't know
if you need those particular fields when you initially fetch the data, you can
tell Django not to retrieve them from the database.
This is done by passing the names of the fields to not load to defer():
A queryset that has deferred fields will still return model instances. Each
deferred field will be retrieved from the database if you access that field
(one at a time, not all the deferred fields at once).
You can make multiple calls to defer(). Each call adds new fields to the
deferred set:
The order in which fields are added to the deferred set does not matter.
Calling defer() with a field name that has already been deferred is
harmless (the field will still be deferred).
You can defer loading of fields in related models (if the related models are
loading via select_related()) by using the standard double-underscore
notation to separate related fields:
If you want to clear the set of deferred fields, pass None as a parameter
to defer():
Some fields in a model won't be deferred, even if you ask for them. You can
never defer the loading of the primary key. If you are using
select_related() to retrieve related models, you shouldn't defer the
loading of the field that connects from the primary model to the related
one, doing so will result in an error.
Note
The defer() method (and its cousin, only(), below) are only for
advanced use-cases. They provide an optimization for when you have analyzed
your queries closely and understand exactly what information you need and
have measured that the difference between returning the fields you need and
the full set of fields for the model will be significant.
Even if you think you are in the advanced use-case situation, only use
defer() when you cannot, at queryset load time, determine if you will need
the extra fields or not. If you are frequently loading and using a
particular subset of your data, the best choice you can make is to
normalize your models and put the non-loaded data into a separate model
(and database table). If the columns must stay in the one table for some
reason, create a model with Meta.managed = False (see the
managed attribute documentation)
containing just the fields you normally need to load and use that where you
might otherwise call defer(). This makes your code more explicit to the
reader, is slightly faster and consumes a little less memory in the Python
process.
For example, both of these models use the same underlying database table:
If many fields need to be duplicated in the unmanaged model, it may be best
to create an abstract model with the shared fields and then have the
unmanaged and managed models inherit from the abstract model.
Note
When calling save() for instances with
deferred fields, only the loaded fields will be saved. See
save() for more details.
only() 
only(*fields) 
The only() method is more or less the opposite of defer(). You call
it with the fields that should not be deferred when retrieving a model.  If
you have a model where almost all the fields need to be deferred, using
only() to specify the complementary set of fields can result in simpler
code.
Suppose you have a model with fields name, age and biography. The
following two querysets are the same, in terms of deferred fields:
Whenever you call only() it replaces the set of fields to load
immediately. The method's name is mnemonic: only those fields are loaded
immediately; the remainder are deferred. Thus, successive calls to only()
result in only the final fields being considered:
Since defer() acts incrementally (adding fields to the deferred list), you
can combine calls to only() and defer() and things will behave
logically:
All of the cautions in the note for the defer() documentation apply to
only() as well. Use it cautiously and only after exhausting your other
options.
Using only() and omitting a field requested using select_related()
is an error as well.
Note
When calling save() for instances with
deferred fields, only the loaded fields will be saved. See
save() for more details.
using() 
using(alias) 
This method is for controlling which database the QuerySet will be
evaluated against if you are using more than one database.  The only argument
this method takes is the alias of a database, as defined in
DATABASES.
select_for_update() 
select_for_update(nowait=False, skip_locked=False, of=(), no_key=False) 
Returns a queryset that will lock rows until the end of the transaction,
generating a SELECT ... FOR UPDATE SQL statement on supported databases.
When the queryset is evaluated (for entry in entries in this case), all
matched entries will be locked until the end of the transaction block, meaning
that other transactions will be prevented from changing or acquiring locks on
them.
Usually, if another transaction has already acquired a lock on one of the
selected rows, the query will block until the lock is released. If this is
not the behavior you want, call select_for_update(nowait=True). This will
make the call non-blocking. If a conflicting lock is already acquired by
another transaction, DatabaseError will be raised when the
queryset is evaluated. You can also ignore locked rows by using
select_for_update(skip_locked=True) instead. The nowait and
skip_locked are mutually exclusive and attempts to call
select_for_update() with both options enabled will result in a
ValueError.
By default, select_for_update() locks all rows that are selected by the
query. For example, rows of related objects specified in select_related()
are locked in addition to rows of the queryset's model. If this isn't desired,
specify the related objects you want to lock in select_for_update(of=(...))
using the same fields syntax as select_related(). Use the value 'self'
to refer to the queryset's model.
Lock parents models in select_for_update(of=(...))
If you want to lock parents models when using multi-table inheritance, you must specify parent link fields (by default
<parent_model_name>_ptr) in the of argument. 
On PostgreSQL only, you can pass no_key=True in order to acquire a weaker
lock, that still allows creating rows that merely reference locked rows
(through a foreign key, for example) while the lock is in place. The
PostgreSQL documentation has more details about row-level lock modes.
You can't use select_for_update() on nullable relations:
To avoid that restriction, you can exclude null objects if you don't care about
them:
Currently, the postgresql, oracle, and mysql database
backends support select_for_update(). However, MariaDB 10.3+ supports only
the nowait argument and MySQL 8.0.1+ supports the nowait,
skip_locked, and of arguments. The no_key argument is supported
only on PostgreSQL.
Passing nowait=True, skip_locked=True, no_key=True, or of to
select_for_update() using database backends that do not support these
options, such as MySQL, raises a NotSupportedError. This
prevents code from unexpectedly blocking.
Evaluating a queryset with select_for_update() in autocommit mode on
backends which support SELECT ... FOR UPDATE is a
TransactionManagementError error because the
rows are not locked in that case. If allowed, this would facilitate data
corruption and could easily be caused by calling code that expects to be run in
a transaction outside of one.
Using select_for_update() on backends which do not support
SELECT ... FOR UPDATE (such as SQLite) will have no effect.
SELECT ... FOR UPDATE will not be added to the query, and an error isn't
raised if select_for_update() is used in autocommit mode.
Warning
Although select_for_update() normally fails in autocommit mode, since
TestCase automatically wraps each test in a
transaction, calling select_for_update() in a TestCase even outside
an atomic() block will (perhaps unexpectedly)
pass without raising a TransactionManagementError. To properly test
select_for_update() you should use
TransactionTestCase.
Certain expressions may not be supported
PostgreSQL doesn't support select_for_update() with
Window expressions.
Changed in Django 3.2: The no_key argument was added.
The of argument was allowed on MySQL 8.0.1+.
raw() 
raw(raw_query, params=(), translations=None, using=None) 
Takes a raw SQL query, executes it, and returns a
django.db.models.query.RawQuerySet instance. This RawQuerySet instance
can be iterated over just like a normal QuerySet to provide object
instances.
See the Performing raw SQL queries for more information.
Warning
raw() always triggers a new query and doesn't account for previous
filtering. As such, it should generally be called from the Manager or
from a fresh QuerySet instance.
Changed in Django 3.2: The default value of the params argument was changed from None to
an empty tuple.
Operators that return new QuerySets 
Combined querysets must use the same model.
AND (&) 
Combines two QuerySets using the SQL AND operator.
The following are equivalent:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE x=1 AND y=2
OR (|) 
Combines two QuerySets using the SQL OR operator.
The following are equivalent:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE x=1 OR y=2
Methods that do not return QuerySets 
The following QuerySet methods evaluate the QuerySet and return
something other than a QuerySet.
These methods do not use a cache (see Caching and QuerySets). Rather,
they query the database each time they're called.
get() 
get(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns the object matching the given lookup parameters, which should be in
the format described in Field lookups. You should use lookups that are
guaranteed unique, such as the primary key or fields in a unique constraint.
If you expect a queryset to already return one row, you can use get()
without any arguments to return the object for that row:
If get() doesn't find any object, it raises a Model.DoesNotExist exception:
If get() finds more than one object, it raises a
Model.MultipleObjectsReturned exception:
Both these exception classes are attributes of the model class, and specific to
that model. If you want to handle such exceptions from several get() calls
for different models, you can use their generic base classes. For example, you
can use django.core.exceptions.ObjectDoesNotExist  to handle
DoesNotExist exceptions from multiple models:
create() 
create(**kwargs) 
A convenience method for creating an object and saving it all in one step.  Thus:
and:
are equivalent.
The force_insert parameter is documented
elsewhere, but all it means is that a new object will always be created.
Normally you won't need to worry about this. However, if your model contains a
manual primary key value that you set and if that value already exists in the
database, a call to create() will fail with an
IntegrityError since primary keys must be unique. Be
prepared to handle the exception if you are using manual primary keys.
get_or_create() 
get_or_create(defaults=None, **kwargs) 
A convenience method for looking up an object with the given kwargs (may be
empty if your model has defaults for all fields), creating one if necessary.
Returns a tuple of (object, created), where object is the retrieved or
created object and created is a boolean specifying whether a new object was
created.
This is meant to prevent duplicate objects from being created when requests are
made in parallel, and as a shortcut to boilerplatish code. 
Here, with concurrent requests, multiple attempts to save a Person with
the same parameters may be made. To avoid this race condition, the above
example can be rewritten using get_or_create() like so:
Any keyword arguments passed to get_or_create() — except an optional one
called defaults — will be used in a get() call. If an object is
found, get_or_create() returns a tuple of that object and False.
Warning
This method is atomic assuming that the database enforces uniqueness of the
keyword arguments (see unique or
unique_together). If the fields used in the
keyword arguments do not have a uniqueness constraint, concurrent calls to
this method may result in multiple rows with the same parameters being
inserted.
You can specify more complex conditions for the retrieved object by chaining
get_or_create() with filter() and using Q objects. For example, to retrieve Robert or Bob Marley if either
exists, and create the latter otherwise:
If multiple objects are found, get_or_create() raises
MultipleObjectsReturned. If an object is not
found, get_or_create() will instantiate and save a new object, returning a
tuple of the new object and True. The new object will be created roughly
according to this algorithm:
In English, that means start with any non-'defaults' keyword argument that
doesn't contain a double underscore (which would indicate a non-exact lookup).
Then add the contents of defaults, overriding any keys if necessary, and
use the result as the keyword arguments to the model class. If there are any
callables in defaults, evaluate them. As hinted at above, this is a
simplification of the algorithm that is used, but it contains all the pertinent
details. The internal implementation has some more error-checking than this and
handles some extra edge-conditions; if you're interested, read the code.
If you have a field named defaults and want to use it as an exact lookup in
get_or_create(), use 'defaults__exact', like so:
The get_or_create() method has similar error behavior to create()
when you're using manually specified primary keys. If an object needs to be
created and the key already exists in the database, an
IntegrityError will be raised.
Finally, a word on using get_or_create() in Django views. Please make sure
to use it only in POST requests unless you have a good reason not to.
GET requests shouldn't have any effect on data. Instead, use POST
whenever a request to a page has a side effect on your data. For more, see
Safe methods in the HTTP spec.
Warning
You can use get_or_create() through ManyToManyField
attributes and reverse relations. In that case you will restrict the queries
inside the context of that relation. That could lead you to some integrity
problems if you don't use it consistently.
Being the following models:
You can use get_or_create() through Book's chapters field, but it only
fetches inside the context of that book:
This is happening because it's trying to get or create "Chapter 1" through the
book "Ulysses", but it can't do any of them: the relation can't fetch that
chapter because it isn't related to that book, but it can't create it either
because title field should be unique.
update_or_create() 
update_or_create(defaults=None, **kwargs) 
A convenience method for updating an object with the given kwargs, creating
a new one if necessary. The defaults is a dictionary of (field, value)
pairs used to update the object. The values in defaults can be callables.
Returns a tuple of (object, created), where object is the created or
updated object and created is a boolean specifying whether a new object was
created.
The update_or_create method tries to fetch an object from database based on
the given kwargs. If a match is found, it updates the fields passed in the
defaults dictionary.
This is meant as a shortcut to boilerplatish code. 
This pattern gets quite unwieldy as the number of fields in a model goes up.
The above example can be rewritten using update_or_create() like so:
For a detailed description of how names passed in kwargs are resolved, see
get_or_create().
As described above in get_or_create(), this method is prone to a
race-condition which can result in multiple rows being inserted simultaneously
if uniqueness is not enforced at the database level.
Like get_or_create() and create(), if you're using manually
specified primary keys and an object needs to be created but the key already
exists in the database, an IntegrityError is raised.
bulk_create() 
bulk_create(objs, batch_size=None, ignore_conflicts=False) 
This method inserts the provided list of objects into the database in an
efficient manner (generally only 1 query, no matter how many objects there
are), and returns created objects as a list, in the same order as provided:
This has a number of caveats though:
The model's save() method will not be called, and the pre_save and
post_save signals will not be sent.
It does not work with child models in a multi-table inheritance scenario.
If the model's primary key is an AutoField, the
primary key attribute can only be retrieved on certain databases (currently
PostgreSQL and MariaDB 10.5+). On other databases, it will not be set.
It does not work with many-to-many relationships.
It casts objs to a list, which fully evaluates objs if it's a
generator. The cast allows inspecting all objects so that any objects with a
manually set primary key can be inserted first. If you want to insert objects
in batches without evaluating the entire generator at once, you can use this
technique as long as the objects don't have any manually set primary keys:
The batch_size parameter controls how many objects are created in a single
query. The default is to create all objects in one batch, except for SQLite
where the default is such that at most 999 variables per query are used.
On databases that support it (all but Oracle), setting the ignore_conflicts
parameter to True tells the database to ignore failure to insert any rows
that fail constraints such as duplicate unique values. Enabling this parameter
disables setting the primary key on each model instance (if the database
normally supports it).
Warning
On MySQL and MariaDB, setting the ignore_conflicts parameter to
True turns certain types of errors, other than duplicate key, into
warnings. Even with Strict Mode.  invalid values or
non-nullable violations. See the MySQL documentation and
MariaDB documentation for more details.
Changed in Django 3.1: Support for the fetching primary key attributes on MariaDB 10.5+ was added.
bulk_update() 
bulk_update(objs, fields, batch_size=None) 
This method efficiently updates the given fields on the provided model
instances, generally with one query:
QuerySet.update() is used to save the changes, so this is more efficient
than iterating through the list of models and calling save() on each of
them, but it has a few caveats:
You cannot update the model's primary key.
Each model's save() method isn't called, and the
pre_save and
post_save signals aren't sent.
If updating a large number of columns in a large number of rows, the SQL
generated can be very large. Avoid this by specifying a suitable
batch_size.
Updating fields defined on multi-table inheritance ancestors will incur an
extra query per ancestor.
When an individual batch contains duplicates, only the first instance in that
batch will result in an update.
The batch_size parameter controls how many objects are saved in a single
query. The default is to update all objects in one batch, except for SQLite
and Oracle which have restrictions on the number of variables used in a query.
count() 
count() 
Returns an integer representing the number of objects in the database matching
the QuerySet.
Example:
A count() call performs a SELECT COUNT(*) behind the scenes, so you
should always use count() rather than loading all of the record into Python
objects and calling len() on the result (unless you need to load the
objects into memory anyway, in which case len() will be faster).
Note that if you want the number of items in a QuerySet and are also
retrieving model instances from it (for example, by iterating over it), it's
probably more efficient to use len(queryset) which won't cause an extra
database query like count() would.
If the queryset has already been fully retrieved, count() will use that
length rather than perform an extra database query.
in_bulk() 
in_bulk(id_list=None, *, field_name='pk') 
Takes a list of field values (id_list) and the field_name for those
values, and returns a dictionary mapping each value to an instance of the
object with the given field value. No
django.core.exceptions.ObjectDoesNotExist exceptions will ever be raised
by in_bulk; that is, any id_list value not matching any instance will
simply be ignored. If id_list isn't provided, all objects
in the queryset are returned. field_name must be a unique field or a
distinct field (if there's only one field specified in distinct()).
field_name defaults to the primary key.
Example:
If you pass in_bulk() an empty list, you'll get an empty dictionary.
Changed in Django 3.2: Using a distinct field was allowed.
iterator() 
iterator(chunk_size=2000) 
Evaluates the QuerySet (by performing the query) and returns an iterator
(see PEP 234) over the results. A QuerySet typically caches its results
internally so that repeated evaluations do not result in additional queries. In
contrast, iterator() will read results directly, without doing any caching
at the QuerySet level (internally, the default iterator calls iterator()
and caches the return value). For a QuerySet which returns a large number of
objects that you only need to access once, this can result in better
performance and a significant reduction in memory.
Note that using iterator() on a QuerySet which has already been
evaluated will force it to evaluate again, repeating the query.
Also, use of iterator() causes previous prefetch_related() calls to be
ignored since these two optimizations do not make sense together.
Depending on the database backend, query results will either be loaded all at
once or streamed from the database using server-side cursors.
With server-side cursors 
Oracle and PostgreSQL use server-side
cursors to stream results from the database without loading the entire result
set into memory.
The Oracle database driver always uses server-side cursors.
With server-side cursors, the chunk_size parameter specifies the number of
results to cache at the database driver level. Fetching bigger chunks
diminishes the number of round trips between the database driver and the
database, at the expense of memory.
On PostgreSQL, server-side cursors will only be used when the
DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS
setting is False. Read Transaction pooling and server-side cursors if
you're using a connection pooler configured in transaction pooling mode. When
server-side cursors are disabled, the behavior is the same as databases that
don't support server-side cursors.
Without server-side cursors 
MySQL doesn't support streaming results, hence the Python database driver loads
the entire result set into memory. The result set is then transformed into
Python row objects by the database adapter using the fetchmany() method
defined in PEP 249.
SQLite can fetch results in batches using fetchmany(), but since SQLite
doesn't provide isolation between queries within a connection, be careful when
writing to the table being iterated over. See Isolation when using QuerySet.iterator() for
more information.
The chunk_size parameter controls the size of batches Django retrieves from
the database driver. Larger batches decrease the overhead of communicating with
the database driver at the expense of a slight increase in memory consumption.
The default value of chunk_size, 2000, comes from a calculation on the
psycopg mailing list:
Assuming rows of 10-20 columns with a mix of textual and numeric data, 2000
is going to fetch less than 100KB of data, which seems a good compromise
between the number of rows transferred and the data discarded if the loop
is exited early.
latest() 
latest(*fields) 
Returns the latest object in the table based on the given field(s).
This example returns the latest Entry in the table, according to the
pub_date field:
You can also choose the latest based on several fields. For example, to select
the Entry with the earliest expire_date when two entries have the same
pub_date:
The negative sign in '-expire_date' means to sort expire_date in
descending order. Since latest() gets the last result, the Entry with
the earliest expire_date is selected.
If your model's Meta specifies
get_latest_by, you can omit any arguments to
earliest() or latest(). The fields specified in
get_latest_by will be used by default.
Like get(), earliest() and latest() raise
DoesNotExist if there is no object with the
given parameters.
Note that earliest() and latest() exist purely for convenience and
readability.
earliest() and latest() may return instances with null dates.
Since ordering is delegated to the database, results on fields that allow
null values may be ordered differently if you use different databases. For
example, PostgreSQL and MySQL sort null values as if they are higher than
non-null values, while SQLite does the opposite.
You may want to filter out null values:
earliest() 
earliest(*fields) 
Works otherwise like latest() except
the direction is changed.
first() 
first() 
Returns the first object matched by the queryset, or None if there
is no matching object. If the QuerySet has no ordering defined, then the
queryset is automatically ordered by the primary key. This can affect
aggregation results as described in Interaction with order_by().
Example:
Note that first() is a convenience method, the following code sample is
equivalent to the above example:
last() 
last() 
Works like  first(), but returns the last object in the queryset.
aggregate() 
aggregate(*args, **kwargs) 
Returns a dictionary of aggregate values (averages, sums, etc.) calculated over
the QuerySet. Each argument to aggregate() specifies a value that will
be included in the dictionary that is returned.
The aggregation functions that are provided by Django are described in
Aggregation Functions below. Since aggregates are also query
expressions, you may combine aggregates with other
aggregates or values to create complex aggregates.
Aggregates specified using keyword arguments will use the keyword as the name
for the annotation. Anonymous arguments will have a name generated for them
based upon the name of the aggregate function and the model field that is being
aggregated. Complex aggregates cannot use anonymous arguments and must specify
a keyword argument as an alias.
For example, when you are working with blog entries, you may want to know the
number of authors that have contributed blog entries:
By using a keyword argument to specify the aggregate function, you can
control the name of the aggregation value that is returned:
For an in-depth discussion of aggregation, see the topic guide on
Aggregation.
exists() 
exists() 
Returns True if the QuerySet contains any results, and False
if not. This tries to perform the query in the simplest and fastest way
possible, but it does execute nearly the same query as a normal
QuerySet query.
exists() is useful for searches relating to both
object membership in a QuerySet and to the existence of any objects in
a QuerySet, particularly in the context of a large QuerySet.
The most efficient method of finding whether a model with a unique field
(e.g. primary_key) is a member of a QuerySet is:
Which will be faster than the following which requires evaluating and iterating
through the entire queryset:
And to find whether a queryset contains any items:
Which will be faster than:
… but not by a large degree (hence needing a large queryset for efficiency
gains).
Additionally, if a some_queryset has not yet been evaluated, but you know
that it will be at some point, then using some_queryset.exists() will do
more overall work (one query for the existence check plus an extra one to later
retrieve the results) than using bool(some_queryset), which retrieves the
results and then checks if any were returned.
update() 
update(**kwargs) 
Performs an SQL update query for the specified fields, and returns
the number of rows matched (which may not be equal to the number of rows
updated if some rows already have the new value).
For example, to turn comments off for all blog entries published in 2010,
you could do this:
(This assumes your Entry model has fields pub_date and comments_on.)
You can update multiple fields — there's no limit on how many. For example,
here we update the comments_on and headline fields:
The update() method is applied instantly, and the only restriction on the
QuerySet that is updated is that it can only update columns in the
model's main table, not on related models. You can't do this, for example:
Filtering based on related fields is still possible, though:
You cannot call update() on a QuerySet that has had a slice taken
or can otherwise no longer be filtered.
The update() method returns the number of affected rows:
If you're just updating a record and don't need to do anything with the model
object, the most efficient approach is to call update(), rather than
loading the model object into memory. For example, instead of doing this:
…do this:
Using update() also prevents a race condition wherein something might
change in your database in the short period of time between loading the object
and calling save().
Finally, realize that update() does an update at the SQL level and, thus,
does not call any save() methods on your models, nor does it emit the
pre_save or
post_save signals (which are a consequence of
calling Model.save()). If you want to
update a bunch of records for a model that has a custom
save() method, loop over them and call
save(), like this:
Ordered queryset 
New in Django 3.2. 
Chaining order_by() with update() is supported only on MariaDB and
MySQL, and is ignored for different databases. This is useful for updating a
unique field in the order that is specified without conflicts. 
Note
order_by() clause will be ignored if it contains annotations, inherited
fields, or lookups spanning relations.
delete() 
delete() 
Performs an SQL delete query on all rows in the QuerySet and
returns the number of objects deleted and a dictionary with the number of
deletions per object type.
The delete() is applied instantly. You cannot call delete() on a
QuerySet that has had a slice taken or can otherwise no longer be
filtered.
For example, to delete all the entries in a particular blog:
By default, Django's ForeignKey emulates the SQL
constraint ON DELETE CASCADE — in other words, any objects with foreign
keys pointing at the objects to be deleted will be deleted along with them.
This cascade behavior is customizable via the
on_delete argument to the
ForeignKey.
The delete() method does a bulk delete and does not call any delete()
methods on your models. It does, however, emit the
pre_delete and
post_delete signals for all deleted objects
(including cascaded deletions).
Django needs to fetch objects into memory to send signals and handle cascades.
However, if there are no cascades and no signals, then Django may take a
fast-path and delete objects without fetching into memory. For large
deletes this can result in significantly reduced memory usage. The amount of
executed queries can be reduced, too.
ForeignKeys which are set to on_delete
DO_NOTHING do not prevent taking the fast-path in deletion.
Note that the queries generated in object deletion is an implementation
detail subject to change.
as_manager() 
classmethod as_manager() 
Class method that returns an instance of Manager
with a copy of the QuerySet's methods. See
Creating a manager with QuerySet methods for more details.
explain() 
explain(format=None, **options) 
Returns a string of the QuerySet's execution plan, which details how the
database would execute the query, including any indexes or joins that would be
used. Knowing these details may help you improve the performance of slow
queries.
For example, when using PostgreSQL:
The output differs significantly between databases.
explain() is supported by all built-in database backends except Oracle
because an implementation there isn't straightforward.
The format parameter changes the output format from the databases's
default, which is usually text-based. PostgreSQL supports 'TEXT',
'JSON', 'YAML', and 'XML' formats. MariaDB and MySQL support
'TEXT' (also called 'TRADITIONAL') and 'JSON' formats. MySQL
8.0.16+ also supports an improved 'TREE' format, which is similar to
PostgreSQL's 'TEXT' output and is used by default, if supported.
Some databases accept flags that can return more information about the query.
Pass these flags as keyword arguments. For example, when using PostgreSQL:
On some databases, flags may cause the query to be executed which could have
adverse effects on your database. For example, the ANALYZE flag supported
by MariaDB, MySQL 8.0.18+, and PostgreSQL could result in changes to data if
there are triggers or if a function is called, even for a SELECT query.
Changed in Django 3.1: Support for the 'TREE' format on MySQL 8.0.16+ and analyze option
on MariaDB and MySQL 8.0.18+ were added.
Field lookups 
Field lookups are how you specify the meat of an SQL WHERE clause. They're
specified as keyword arguments to the QuerySet methods filter(),
exclude() and get().
For an introduction, see models and database queries documentation.
Django's built-in lookups are listed below. It is also possible to write
custom lookups for model fields.
As a convenience when no lookup type is provided (like in
Entry.objects.get(id=14)) the lookup type is assumed to be exact.
exact 
Exact match. If the value provided for comparison is None, it will be
interpreted as an SQL NULL (see isnull for more details).
Examples:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE id = 14;
SELECT ... WHERE id IS NULL;
MySQL comparisons
In MySQL, a database table's "collation" setting determines whether
exact comparisons are case-sensitive. This is a database setting, not
a Django setting. It's possible to configure your MySQL tables to use
case-sensitive comparisons, but some trade-offs are involved. For more
information about this, see the collation section
in the databases documentation.
iexact 
Case-insensitive exact match. If the value provided for comparison is None,
it will be interpreted as an SQL NULL (see isnull for more
details).
Example:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE name ILIKE 'beatles blog';
SELECT ... WHERE name IS NULL;
Note the first query will match 'Beatles Blog', 'beatles blog',
'BeAtLes BLoG', etc.
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
SQLite does not do case-insensitive matching for non-ASCII strings.
contains 
Case-sensitive containment test.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline LIKE '%Lennon%';
Note this will match the headline 'Lennon honored today' but not 'lennon
honored today'.
SQLite users
SQLite doesn't support case-sensitive LIKE statements; contains
acts like icontains for SQLite. See the database note for more information.
icontains 
Case-insensitive containment test.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline ILIKE '%Lennon%';
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
in 
In a given iterable; often a list, tuple, or queryset. It's not a common use
case, but strings (being iterables) are accepted.
Examples:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE id IN (1, 3, 4);
SELECT ... WHERE headline IN ('a', 'b', 'c');
You can also use a queryset to dynamically evaluate the list of values
instead of providing a list of literal values:
This queryset will be evaluated as subselect statement:
SELECT ... WHERE blog.id IN (SELECT id FROM ... WHERE NAME LIKE '%Cheddar%')
If you pass in a QuerySet resulting from values() or values_list()
as the value to an __in lookup, you need to ensure you are only extracting
one field in the result. For example, this will work (filtering on the blog
names):
This example will raise an exception, since the inner query is trying to
extract two field values, where only one is expected:
Performance considerations
Be cautious about using nested queries and understand your database
server's performance characteristics (if in doubt, benchmark!). Some
database backends, most notably MySQL, don't optimize nested queries very
well. It is more efficient, in those cases, to extract a list of values
and then pass that into the second query. That is, execute two queries
instead of one:
Note the list() call around the Blog QuerySet to force execution of
the first query. Without it, a nested query would be executed, because
QuerySets are lazy.
gt 
Greater than.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE id > 4;
gte 
Greater than or equal to.
lt 
Less than.
lte 
Less than or equal to.
startswith 
Case-sensitive starts-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline LIKE 'Lennon%';
SQLite doesn't support case-sensitive LIKE statements; startswith acts
like istartswith for SQLite.
istartswith 
Case-insensitive starts-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline ILIKE 'Lennon%';
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
endswith 
Case-sensitive ends-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline LIKE '%Lennon';
SQLite users
SQLite doesn't support case-sensitive LIKE statements; endswith
acts like iendswith for SQLite. Refer to the database note documentation for more.
iendswith 
Case-insensitive ends-with.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE headline ILIKE '%Lennon'
SQLite users
When using the SQLite backend and non-ASCII strings, bear in mind the
database note about string comparisons.
range 
Range test (inclusive).
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date BETWEEN '2005-01-01' and '2005-03-31';
You can use range anywhere you can use BETWEEN in SQL — for dates,
numbers and even characters.
Warning
Filtering a DateTimeField with dates won't include items on the last
day, because the bounds are interpreted as "0am on the given date". If
pub_date was a DateTimeField, the above expression would be turned
into this SQL:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date BETWEEN '2005-01-01 00:00:00' and '2005-03-31 00:00:00';
Generally speaking, you can't mix dates and datetimes.
date 
For datetime fields, casts the value as date. Allows chaining additional field
lookups. Takes a date value.
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, fields are converted to the current time
zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions in the
database.
year 
For date and datetime fields, an exact year match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer year.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date BETWEEN '2005-01-01' AND '2005-12-31';
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date >= '2005-01-01';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
iso_year 
For date and datetime fields, an exact ISO 8601 week-numbering year match.
Allows chaining additional field lookups. Takes an integer year.
Example:
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
month 
For date and datetime fields, an exact month match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer 1 (January) through 12 (December).
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('month' FROM pub_date) = '12';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('month' FROM pub_date) >= '6';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
day 
For date and datetime fields, an exact day match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer day.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('day' FROM pub_date) = '3';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('day' FROM pub_date) >= '3';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
Note this will match any record with a pub_date on the third day of the month,
such as January 3, July 3, etc.
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
week 
For date and datetime fields, return the week number (1-52 or 53) according
to ISO-8601, i.e., weeks start
on a Monday and the first week contains the year's first Thursday.
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
week_day 
For date and datetime fields, a 'day of the week' match. Allows chaining
additional field lookups.
Takes an integer value representing the day of week from 1 (Sunday) to 7
(Saturday).
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
Note this will match any record with a pub_date that falls on a Monday (day
2 of the week), regardless of the month or year in which it occurs. Week days
are indexed with day 1 being Sunday and day 7 being Saturday.
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
iso_week_day 
New in Django 3.1. 
For date and datetime fields, an exact ISO 8601 day of the week match. Allows
chaining additional field lookups.
Takes an integer value representing the day of the week from 1 (Monday) to 7
(Sunday).
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
Note this will match any record with a pub_date that falls on a Monday (day
1 of the week), regardless of the month or year in which it occurs. Week days
are indexed with day 1 being Monday and day 7 being Sunday.
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
quarter 
For date and datetime fields, a 'quarter of the year' match. Allows chaining
additional field lookups. Takes an integer value between 1 and 4 representing
the quarter of the year.
Example to retrieve entries in the second quarter (April 1 to June 30):
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
time 
For datetime fields, casts the value as time. Allows chaining additional field
lookups. Takes a datetime.time value.
Example:
(No equivalent SQL code fragment is included for this lookup because
implementation of the relevant query varies among different database engines.)
When USE_TZ is True, fields are converted to the current time
zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions in the
database.
hour 
For datetime and time fields, an exact hour match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer between 0 and 23.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('hour' FROM timestamp) = '23';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('hour' FROM time) = '5';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('hour' FROM timestamp) >= '12';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
minute 
For datetime and time fields, an exact minute match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer between 0 and 59.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('minute' FROM timestamp) = '29';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('minute' FROM time) = '46';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('minute' FROM timestamp) >= '29';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
second 
For datetime and time fields, an exact second match. Allows chaining additional
field lookups. Takes an integer between 0 and 59.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('second' FROM timestamp) = '31';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('second' FROM time) = '2';
SELECT ... WHERE EXTRACT('second' FROM timestamp) >= '31';
(The exact SQL syntax varies for each database engine.)
When USE_TZ is True, datetime fields are converted to the
current time zone before filtering. This requires time zone definitions
in the database.
isnull 
Takes either True or False, which correspond to SQL queries of
IS NULL and IS NOT NULL, respectively.
Example:
SQL equivalent:
SELECT ... WHERE pub_date IS NULL;
Deprecated since version 3.1: Using non-boolean values as the right-hand side is deprecated, use True
or False instead. In Django 4.0, the exception will be raised.
regex 
Case-sensitive regular expression match.
The regular expression syntax is that of the database backend in use.
In the case of SQLite, which has no built in regular expression support,
this feature is provided by a (Python) user-defined REGEXP function, and
the regular expression syntax is therefore that of Python's re module.
Example:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP BINARY '^(An?|The) +'; -- MySQL
SELECT ... WHERE REGEXP_LIKE(title, '^(An?|The) +', 'c'); -- Oracle
SELECT ... WHERE title ~ '^(An?|The) +'; -- PostgreSQL
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP '^(An?|The) +'; -- SQLite
Using raw strings (e.g., r'foo' instead of 'foo') for passing in the
regular expression syntax is recommended.
iregex 
Case-insensitive regular expression match.
Example:
SQL equivalents:
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP '^(an?|the) +'; -- MySQL
SELECT ... WHERE REGEXP_LIKE(title, '^(an?|the) +', 'i'); -- Oracle
SELECT ... WHERE title ~* '^(an?|the) +'; -- PostgreSQL
SELECT ... WHERE title REGEXP '(?i)^(an?|the) +'; -- SQLite
Aggregation functions 
Django provides the following aggregation functions in the
django.db.models module. For details on how to use these
aggregate functions, see the topic guide on aggregation. See the Aggregate
documentation to learn how to create your aggregates.
Warning
SQLite can't handle aggregation on date/time fields out of the box.
This is because there are no native date/time fields in SQLite and Django
currently emulates these features using a text field. Attempts to use
aggregation on date/time fields in SQLite will raise NotSupportedError.
Note
Aggregation functions return None when used with an empty
QuerySet. For example, the Sum aggregation function returns None
instead of 0 if the QuerySet contains no entries. An exception is
Count, which does return 0 if the QuerySet is empty.
All aggregates have the following parameters in common:
expressions 
Strings that reference fields on the model, transforms of the field, or
query expressions.
Changed in Django 3.2: Support for transforms of the field was added.
output_field 
An optional argument that represents the model field
of the return value
Note
When combining multiple field types, Django can only determine the
output_field if all fields are of the same type. Otherwise, you
must provide the output_field yourself.
filter 
An optional Q object that's used to filter the
rows that are aggregated.
See Conditional aggregation and Filtering on annotations for
example usage.
**extra 
Keyword arguments that can provide extra context for the SQL generated
by the aggregate.
Avg 
class Avg(expression, output_field=None, distinct=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the mean value of the given expression, which must be numeric
unless you specify a different output_field.
Default alias: <field>__avg
Return type: float if input is int, otherwise same as input
field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
distinct 
If distinct=True, Avg returns the mean value of unique values.
This is the SQL equivalent of AVG(DISTINCT <field>). The default
value is False.
Count 
class Count(expression, distinct=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the number of objects that are related through the provided
expression.
Default alias: <field>__count
Return type: int
Has one optional argument:
distinct 
If distinct=True, the count will only include unique instances.
This is the SQL equivalent of COUNT(DISTINCT <field>). The default
value is False.
Max 
class Max(expression, output_field=None, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the maximum value of the given expression.
Default alias: <field>__max
Return type: same as input field, or output_field if supplied
Min 
class Min(expression, output_field=None, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the minimum value of the given expression.
Default alias: <field>__min
Return type: same as input field, or output_field if supplied
StdDev 
class StdDev(expression, output_field=None, sample=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the standard deviation of the data in the provided expression.
Default alias: <field>__stddev
Return type: float if input is int, otherwise same as input
field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
sample 
By default, StdDev returns the population standard deviation. However,
if sample=True, the return value will be the sample standard deviation.
Sum 
class Sum(expression, output_field=None, distinct=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Computes the sum of all values of the given expression.
Default alias: <field>__sum
Return type: same as input field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
distinct 
If distinct=True, Sum returns the sum of unique values. This is
the SQL equivalent of SUM(DISTINCT <field>). The default value is
False.
Variance 
class Variance(expression, output_field=None, sample=False, filter=None, **extra)[source] 
Returns the variance of the data in the provided expression.
Default alias: <field>__variance
Return type: float if input is int, otherwise same as input
field, or output_field if supplied
Has one optional argument:
sample 
By default, Variance returns the population variance. However,
if sample=True, the return value will be the sample variance.
Query-related tools 
This section provides reference material for query-related tools not documented
elsewhere.
Q() objects 
class Q[source] 
A Q() object represents an SQL condition that can be used in
database-related operations. It's similar to how an
F() object represents the value of a model field
or annotation. They make it possible to define and reuse conditions, and
combine them using operators such as | (OR) and & (AND). See
Complex lookups with Q objects.
Prefetch() objects 
class Prefetch(lookup, queryset=None, to_attr=None)[source] 
The Prefetch() object can be used to control the operation of
prefetch_related().
The lookup argument describes the relations to follow and works the same
as the string based lookups passed to
prefetch_related(). 
<QuerySet [<Choice: Not much>, <Choice: The sky>, <Choice: Just hacking again>]>
# This will only execute two queries regardless of the number of Question
# and Choice objects.
<QuerySet [<Question: What's up?>]>
The queryset argument supplies a base QuerySet for the given lookup.
This is useful to further filter down the prefetch operation, or to call
select_related() from the prefetched
relation, hence reducing the number of queries even further:
<QuerySet [<Choice: The sky>]>
<QuerySet [<Choice: The sky>]>
The to_attr argument sets the result of the prefetch operation to a custom
attribute:
[<Choice: The sky>]
<QuerySet [<Choice: Not much>, <Choice: The sky>, <Choice: Just hacking again>]>
Note
When using to_attr the prefetched result is stored in a list. This can
provide a significant speed improvement over traditional
prefetch_related calls which store the cached result within a
QuerySet instance.
prefetch_related_objects() 
prefetch_related_objects(model_instances, *related_lookups)[source] 
Prefetches the given lookups on an iterable of model instances. This is useful
in code that receives a list of model instances as opposed to a QuerySet;
for example, when fetching models from a cache or instantiating them manually.
Pass an iterable of model instances (must all be of the same class) and the
lookups or Prefetch objects you want to prefetch for. 
When using multiple databases with prefetch_related_objects, the prefetch
query will use the database associated with the model instance. This can be
overridden by using a custom queryset in a related lookup.
FilteredRelation() objects 
class FilteredRelation(relation_name, *, condition=Q())[source] 
relation_name 
The name of the field on which you'd like to filter the relation.
condition 
A Q object to control the filtering.
FilteredRelation is used with annotate() to create an
ON clause when a JOIN is performed. It doesn't act on the default
relationship but on the annotation name (pizzas_vegetarian in example
below).
For example, to find restaurants that have vegetarian pizzas with
'mozzarella' in the name:
If there are a large number of pizzas, this queryset performs better than:
because the filtering in the WHERE clause of the first queryset will only
operate on vegetarian pizzas.
FilteredRelation doesn't support:
QuerySet.only() and prefetch_related().
A GenericForeignKey
inherited from a parent model.
Changed in Django 3.2: Support for nested relations was added.
